G. NARAYANAMMA INSTITUTE OF
TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE
(AUTONOMOUS)    (For Women)
Shaikpet, Hyderabad –500104.
ACADEMIC REGULATIONS
COURSE STRUCTURE
AND
DETAILED SYLLABUS
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND
ENGINEERING
FOR
B.TECH FOUR YEAR DEGREE COURSE
(Applicable for the batches admitted from 2022-23)DEPARTMENT OF
COMPUTER  SCIENCE  AND ENGINEERING
DEPARTMENT VISION
To provide engineering education in the field of Computer
Science with evolving technologies and to produce self-
motivated, employable individuals to society.
DEPARTMENT MISSION
 To pioneer education in Computer Science and
Engineering, Mathematics and Sciences, to mould the
overall personality of students.
 To nurture the students to be dynamic, industry ready
and to have multidisciplinary skills and leadership
qualities.
 To inculcate work ethics and commitment in students
for their future endeavors to serve the society.G. NARAYANAMMA INSTITUTE OF
TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE
(AUTONOMOUS)  (For Women)
Shaikpet, Hyderabad –500104.
ACADEMIC REGULATIONS
COURSE STRUCTURE
AND
DETAILED SYLLABUS
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND
ENGINEERING
FOR
B.TECH FOUR YEAR DEGREE COURSE
(Applicable for the batches admitted from 2022-23)2022-2023 3
ACADEMIC REGULATIONS (R22)
For CBCS Based B.Tech. Degree Programmes
(Applicable for the students admitted into I year from the Academic Year
2022-23 and onwards)
1.0 Under-Graduate Degree Programme (UGDP) in Engineering &
Technology (E&T)
G . Narayanamma Institute of Technology & Science (GNITS) - for
Women, Hyderabad, an Autonomous College approved by AICTE,
New Delhi, and affiliated to Jawaharlal Nehru Technological
University Hyderabad (JNTUH), Hyderabad, offers 4 Year (8
Semesters) Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech.) Degree Programme
under Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) with effect from the
Academic Year 2022 – 23 onwards in the following Branches of
Engineering & Technology (Table 1.0):
S.No. Programme
I. Computer Science & Engineering (CSE)
II. Electrical & Electronics Engineering (EEE)
III. Electronics & Communication Engineering (ECE)
IV . Electronics & Telematics Engineering (ETE)
V . Information Technology (IT)
VI. Computer Science & Engineering (Artificial Intelligence
& Machine Learning) (CSM)
VII. Computer Science & Engineering (Data Science) (CSD)
VIII. Computer Science & Technology (CST)
Table 1.0
2.0 Eligibility for Admission
2.1 The Admission to the UGDP shall be made either on the basis of the
merit rank obtained by the qualifying candidate at an Entrance Test
conducted by the Telangana State Government (TSEAMCET), OR
the University, OR on the basis of any other order of merit approved
by the University, subject to the reservations as prescribed by the
Government from time to time.
2.2 The medium of instruction for the entire UG Degree Programme in
E&T shall be ENGLISH only.
3.0 B.Tech. Degree Programme Structure
3.1 The B.Tech. Degree Programmes at GNITS are of Semester Pattern,
with 8 Semesters constituting 4 Academic  Years and each Academic
Year is of TWO Semesters (First/Odd and Second/Even Semesters).
Each Semester shall be of 22 Weeks duration (inclusive of
Examinations), with a minimum of 90 Instructional Days per Semester.4 Computer Science and Engineering
3.2 UGC/AICTE specified Definitions/Descriptions areadopted
appropriately for various terms and abbreviations used in these
Academic Regulations/ Norms, which are listed under Clauses 3.2.1
to 3.2.4. The Course Structure is organized based on the AICTE Model
Curriculum for Under-Graduate Degree Courses in Engineering &
Technology (Jan. 2018).
3.2.1 Semester Scheme:
Each UGDP is of 4 Academic Years (8 Semesters), with each academic
year divided into two semesters of 22 weeks (90 working days) each.
Each semester has 2 components of evaluation - ‘Continuous Internal
Evaluation (CIE)’ and ‘End Semester Examination or Semester End
Examination (SEE)’. Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) and Credit
Based Semester System (CBSS) as denoted by UGC, and Course
Structure/Curriculum as suggested by AICTE are followed. The terms
‘SUBJECT’ or ‘COURSE’ imply the same meaning here, and refer to
‘Theory Subject’, or ‘Lab/Practical Course’, or ‘Design/ Drawing
Subject’, or ‘Elective’, or ‘Open Elective”, or ‘Seminar’, or ‘Project’,
or ‘Mini-Project’, or ‘Online Course’, as the case may be.
3.2.2 All the Subjects/ Courses are to be registered by a student in a Semester
to earn Credits. Credits shall be assigned to each Subject/ Course in a
L:  T:  P:  C (Lecture Periods:  Tutorial Periods:  Practical Periods:
Credits) Structure based on the following general pattern:
l One Credit - for One hour/ Week/ Semester for Theory/ Lecture (L)
Courses, and Tutorials (T); and,
l One Credit - for Two hours/ Week/ Semester for Laboratory/ Practical
(P) Courses.
l Mandatory Courses (MC) will not carry Credits.
3.2.3 Subject/ Course Classification
All the Subjects/ Courses offered for the UGDP are broadly classified
as: (a) Foundation Courses (FnC), (b) Core Courses (CoC), and (c)
Elective Courses (E
C).
l Foundation Courses (FnC) are further categorized as:
i) HS (Humanities and Social Sciences including Management
Courses),
ii) BS (Basic Sciences Courses), and
iii) ES (Engineering Sciences Courses);
l Core Courses (CoC) and Elective Courses (EC) are categorized as
PS (Professional Subjects), which are further subdivided as:
i) PC (Professional/ Departmental Core) Courses
ii) PE (Professional/ Departmental Electives) Courses
iii) OE (Open Electives) Courses; and
iv) Project Works (PW);2022-2023 5
l Additional Courses:
n ONLINE Courses (OL - offered on MOOCS platform by NPTEL/
IITs) approved by JNTUH;
n MC - No Credits allocated.
3.2.4 Course Nomenclature:
The Curriculum Nomenclature or Course Structure Grouping for each
UG Degree Programme (or B.Tech. Degree Course) is as listed below
(along with AICTE specified % Range of Credits) in Table 3.2.4:
Include -
Mathematics,
Physics, Chemistry,
Biology Subjects
R22
Regula-
tions at
GNITS
22.5 C
(14.06 %)
Range of
Credits
(AICTE
Model)
15%  -
20%
Broad
Course
Classifi-
cation
Course
Group/
Category
Course
Description
BS – Basic
Sciences
Elective
Courses
(EC)
1)
S.
No.
Include fundamental
engineering subjects
Include subjects
related to
Humanities, Social
Sciences and
Management
Include core subjects
related to the Parent
Department/ Branch
of Engg.
Include Elective
subjects related to
the Parent
Department/ Branch
of Engg.
Elective subjects
include subjects
from other Technical
and/ or Emerging
Subject Areas
ES -
Engineering
Sciences
HS –
Humanities &
Social
Sciences
PC –
Professional
Core
PE –
Professional
Electives
OE – Open
Electives
2)
3)
Foundation
Courses
(FnC)
Core
Courses
(CoC)
4)
5)
6)
15%  -
20%
5%  -
10%
30% -
40%
10% -
15%
5% -
10%
25 C
(15.63 %)
12 C
(7.5 %)
54.5 C
(34.06 %)
18 C
(11.25 %)
9 C
(5.62 %)6 Computer Science and Engineering
4.0 Course Work
4.1 A student after securing admission, shall pursue the B.Tech. UG Degree
Programme in a minimum period of 4 Academic Years, and a maximum
period of 8 Academic Years (with effect from the Date of
Commencement of I Year).
4.2 As suggested by AICTE, a 3-week ‘Mandatory Induction Programme’
shall be offered for all the Branches of Engineering at the start of the
I Year UGDP, to enable the newly admitted students get acquainted
with the new professional environment, to develop awareness and
understanding of the engineering education requirements, and to get
them prepared for the academic schedules ahead. The features,
activities and pattern of the Induction Programme shall be as per the
guidelines suggested in the Model Curriculum. Conventional class
work shall commence only after the completion of the Induction
Programme.
4.3 Each student shall Register for and secure the specified number of
Credits (160 Credits) required for the completion of the UGDP and
Award of the B.Tech. Degree in the respective Branch of Engineering.
4.4 Each Semester is structured to provide 20 Credits (20 C), totaling to
160 Credits (160 C) for the entire B.Tech. Programme.
Project Work
B.Tech. Project or
UG Project or UG
Major Project
Mini-Project/
Industrial Training /
Internship/ UG
Mini-Project
Seminar based on
core contents related
to Parent
Department/ Branch
of Engg.
7)
8)
9)
Projects
Related
Courses
(PW)
Mini-Project
Seminar
MC10) Mandatory
Courses Mandatory Courses
11) Additional
Courses
ONLINE
Courses (OL)
Offered on
MOOCS platform by
NPTEL/ IITs
10% -
15%
No
Credits
19 C
(11.88 %)
-
24 CADDI-
TIONALs
160
(100%)
160
(100%)Total Credits for UG (B. Tech.) Degree Programme
Table 3.2.42022-2023 7
5.0 Course Registration
5.1 A ‘Faculty Advisor or Counselor’ shall be assigned to each B.Tech.
student and the Faculty Advisor assigned shall advise/counsel the
student about the UGDP, its Course Structure and Curriculum, Choice/
Option for Subjects/Courses, based on the competence, progress, pre-
requisites and interest of the student.
5.2 The Academic/Examination Section of the College invites
‘Registration Forms’ from the students apriori (before the beginning
of the Semester) through ‘ONLINE SUBMISSIONS’, ensuring ‘DATE
and TIME Stamping’. The ONLINE Registration Requests for any
‘CURRENT SEMESTER’ shall be completed BEFORE the
commencement of SEEs (Semester End Examinations) of the
‘PRECEDING SEMESTER’.
5.3 Every individual student is advised to register for all the number of
credits (20 Credits) indicated in that semester workload of the
respective UGDP Course Structure - this is termed as the ‘Normal
Work Load’ (NWL).
5.4 A student can apply for ONLINE Registration, ONLY AFTER
obtaining the ‘WRITTEN APPROV AL’ from her assigned Faculty
Advisor, which should be submitted to the College Academic/
Examination Section through the Head of the Department. (a copy of
the same is to be retained by the Head of the Department, Faculty
Advisor and the student).
5.5 A student may be permitted to register for the Subjects/ Courses of
her choice with the typical work load (20 Credits) suggested in the
respective semester credit load allocation of that UGDP Course
Structure as the Normal Work Load (NWL), and the Maximum Work
Load per semester (MWL) – with permissible additional courses within
the Course Structure (subject to a maximum of 2 Theory Courses and
1 Lab Course) of her choice, is limited to a total work load of 28
Credits, based on her PROGRESS and SGPA/ CGPA, and completion
of the ‘PRE-REQUISITES’ as indicated for various Subjects/ Courses
in the Department Course Structure and Syllabus contents.
5.6 The choice for the ‘additional/extra’ Subjects/Courses to reach the
Maximum Work Load (MWL) of 28 Credits (above the NWL
specified) in each semester must be clearly indicated on a request
letter, which needs the specific approvals and signatures of the Faculty
Advisor/ Counselor and the HoD on the hardcopy.
5.7 If the student submits ambiguous choices or multiple options or
erroneous entries during ONLINE Registration for the Subject(s) /
Course(s) under a given/ specified Course Group/ Category as listed
in the Course Structure, only the first correctly mentioned Subject/
Course in that category shall be taken into consideration, as applicable.8 Computer Science and Engineering
5.8 The Subject/Course Options exercised through ONLINE Registration
are final and CANNOT be changed, and CANNOT be inter-changed;
further, alternate choices shall also be not considered. However, if the
Subject/ Course that has already been listed for Registration (by the
Head of the Department) in a semester could not be offered on account
of any unforeseen or unavoidable reasons, then the student shall be
allowed to have alternate choice - either for a new Subject (subject to
offering of such a Subject), or for another existing Subject (subject to
availability of seats), which may be considered. Such alternate
arrangements shall be made by the Head of the Department, with due
notification and time-framed schedule, within the FIRST WEEK from
the commencement of class-work for that semester.
5.9 Dropping of the Subjects/ Courses may be permitted ONLY AFTER
obtaining the prior approval from the Faculty Advisor assigned (subject
to the retaining of the NWL), ‘within 15 Days of Time’ from the
beginning of the current semester.
5.10 For the Mandatory Courses, a ‘Satisfactory Participation Certificate’
from the concerned authorities of the relevant semester is essential.
No Marks or Grades or Credits shall be awarded for the Mandatory
Courses.
6.0   Subjects/ Courses to be offered
6.1 A typical Section strength (or Class strength) for each semester shall
be 60.
6.2 A Subject/ Course may be offered to the students, ONLY IF a Minimum
of 30 Students opt for the same. The Maximum Class Strength of a
Section is limited to 80.
6.3 More than ONE TEACHER may offer the SAME SUBJECT (Theory/
Tutorials/Lab./Practicals) in any semester. However, selection choice
for students will be based on - ‘FIRST COME FIRST SERVE Basis
and CGPA Criterion’ (ie., the first focus shall be on the earliest stamping
of ONLINE ENTRY from the student for Registration in that semester,
and the second focus, if needed, shall be on the existing CGPA of the
student).
6.4 If more entries for the Registration of a Subject come into picture,
then the Head of the Department concerned shall take necessary action,
whether to offer such a Subject/ Course for TWO (or multiple)
SECTIONS or NOT .
6.5 In case of the options coming from the students of the other
Departments/ Branches/ Disciplines also (not considering OPEN
ELECTIVES), PRIORITY shall be given to the student of the ‘Parent
Department/Branch’ first.2022-2023 9
7.0 Attendance Requirements
7.1 A student shall be eligible to appear for the End Semester Examinations
if she acquires a minimum of 75% of attendance in aggregate of all
the Subjects/Courses (including Mandatory or Non-Credit Courses)
for that semester. Two periods of attendance for each theory subject
shall be considered, if the student appears for the mid-term examination
of that subject.
7.2 Condoning of shortage of attendance in aggregate up to 10% (65%
and above, and below 75%) in each semester may be granted by the
College Academic Committee (CAC) on genuine and valid grounds
based on the student’s representation with supporting evidence.
7.3 A stipulated fee shall be payable towards condoning of shortage of
attendance.
7.4 Shortage of Attendance below 65% in aggregate shall in NO CASE
be condoned.
7.5 A student, whose shortage of attendance is not condoned in a semester
is not eligible to take her End Examinations of that semester; she gets
detained and her registration for that semester shall stand cancelled.
She will not be promoted to the next semester. She may seek re-
registration for all those Subjects registered in that semester in which
she got detained, by seeking re-admission for that semester as and
when offered; in case if there are any Professional Electives and/ or
Open Electives, the same may also be re-registered if offered, however,
if those Electives are not offered in later semesters, then alternate
Electives may be chosen from the same set of Elective Subjects
available under that Elective category.
8.0 Academic Requirements
The following Academic Requirements have to be satisfied in addition
to the Attendance Requirements mentioned under Clause 7.0.
8.1 A student shall be deemed to have satisfied the Academic Requirements
and earned the Credits allotted to each Subject/ Course (except for
Seminar and Mini-Projects), if she secures not less than 35% (14 marks
out of 40 marks) in CIE (Continuous Internal Evaluation), not less
than 35% (21 marks out of 60 marks) in SEE (Semester End
Examination), and a minimum of 40% (40 marks out of 100 marks) in
the sum total of the CIE (Continuous Internal Evaluation) and SEE
(Semester End Examination) taken together; in terms of Letter Grades,
this implies securing ‘C’ grade or above in that subject/ course.
8.2 A student shall be deemed to have satisfied the Academic Requirements
and earned the Credits allotted to the Seminar (IV Year II Semester)
and the Mini-Projects (II Year II Semester, and III Year II Semester),
if she secures not less than 40% of the total marks (that is, 40 out of10 Computer Science and Engineering
100 marks allotted) for each of them. The student would be treated as
failed, if she - (i) does not submit a report on her Mini-Projects, or
does not make a presentation of the same before the Evaluation
Committee as per specified schedule, or (ii) does not present the
Seminar as required in the IV year II Semester, or (iii) secures less
than 40% of marks (that is, 40 marks) in the Mini-Projects/ Seminar
evaluations. She may reappear once for each of the Mini-Projects/
Seminar evaluations, as and when they are scheduled again; if she
fails in such ‘one reappearance’ evaluation also, she has to reappear
for the same in the next subsequent semester, as and when they are
scheduled, as supplementary candidate.
8.3 A student will not be promoted from the I Year to the II Year, unless
she fulfills the Attendance and Academic Requirements and secures a
total of 20 Credits out of 40 Credits specified for the I Year, from all
the relevant regular and supplementary examinations, whether she
takes those examinations or not.
8.4 A student will not be promoted from the II Year to the III Year, unless
she fulfills the Attendance and Academic Requirements and secures a
total of 48 Credits out of 80 Credits specified up to and inclusive of
the II Year II Semester, from all the relevant regular and supplementary
examinations, whether she takes those examinations or not.
8.5 A student will not be promoted from the III Year to the IV Year, unless
she fulfils the Attendance and Academic Requirements and secures a
total of 72 Credits out of 120 Credits specified up to and inclusive of
the III Year II Semester, from all the relevant regular and supplementary
examinations, whether she takes those examinations or not.
8.6 A student - (i) shall register for all the Subjects covering 160 Credits
as specified and listed (with the relevant Course/ Subject
Classifications as mentioned) in the Course Structure, (ii) puts up all
the Attendance and Academic requirements for 160 Credits securing
a minimum of C Grade (Pass Grade) or above in each Subject, (iii)
earns ALL 160 Credits securing SGPA 5.0 ( in each semester), and
CGPA (at the end of each successive semester) 5.0, and (iv)
satisfactorily completes all Mandatory Courses; to successfully
complete the UG Degree Programme. THERE IS NO EXEMPTION
OF CREDITS IN ANY CASE
8.7 B.Tech. Degree Programme with HONORS/ MINOR DEGREE
in EMERGING AREAS as per AICTE Norms and JNTUH
Specifications (with effect from 2022-23 Academic Year):
a) GNITS offers B.Tech. Degree Programme with HONORS in CSE
Branch of CSE Department, with the JNTUH stipulated Regulations
and Eligibility Conditions. Accordingly, students need to acquire2022-2023 11
20 additional Credits in specified subjects offered from identified
Emerging Areas during III Year and IV Year, for HONORS
specialization in the same Major Discipline/Branch of Engineering.
The Academic Regulations, Eligibility Conditions, Registration and
other details are listed in Annexure-H (enclosed).
b) GNITS offers B.Tech. Degree Programmes with MINOR DEGREE
in the following Emerging Areas – (i) Artificial Intelligence &
Machine Learning (AI & ML), (ii) Cyber Security (CS), (iii) Data
Science (DS), (iv) Internet of Things (IoT), v) Advanced Web
Development (AWD – under AICTE-LITE Programme - Online),
with the JNTUH specified Regulations and Eligibility Conditions.
Accordingly, students need to acquire 18 additional Credits in
specified subjects offered from identified Emerging Areas, during
III Year and IV Year, for MINOR DEGREE specialization from
other Departments/Branches of Engineering.
The Academic Regulations, Eligibility Conditions, Registration and
other details are listed in Annexure-M (enclosed).
c) Students who opt for the above HONORS/ MINOR DEGREE
Programmes should not have any backlogs, as per JNTUH
stipulations (details listed in Annexures - H and M).
d) If the student fails to get the JNTUH stipulated number of Credits
(18 for Minor Degree and 20 for Honors) within 4 years from the
date of commencement of their UGDP, then they shall get only the
B.Tech. Degree with the Major Engineering Branch Specialization
in which they were admitted in I Year, subject to completion of the
required 160 C (as per NWL). All the other Credits they have
acquired (beyond this 160 C) shall only be listed as ‘Additional
Subjects/ Courses chosen’ in the Marks Memo along with the Grade
obtained. The performances in these ‘Additional Subjects’ shall
not be taken into account while calculating the SGPA and CGPA of
the B.Tech. Degree Programme.
e) If a student takes prior permission and registers for any ‘Additional
Subjects’ (in the parent Department or other Departments/Branches
of Engg.) other than those listed Subjects totaling to 160 Credits as
specified in the Course Structure of her Department, without
HONORS/ MINOR DEGREE considerations (as listed above), the
performances in those ‘Additional Subjects’ (although evaluated
and graded) shall not be taken into account while calculating the
SGPA and CGPA of the B.Tech. Degree Programme. For such
‘Additional Subjects’ registered, the % of marks and/or the Letter
Grade alone may be indicated in the Marks Memo as a performance
measure, subject to the completion of the Attendance and Academic
Requirements as stated under Clauses 7.0 and 8.1 – 8.6.12 Computer Science and Engineering
8.8 Students who fail to earn 160 Credits as per the Course Structure, and
as indicated above, within 8 Academic Years from the Date of the
Commencement of their I Year, shall forfeit their seats in B.Tech.
Programme and their admissions shall stand cancelled.
8.9 When a student is detained due to the shortage of attendance in any
semester, she may be re-admitted into that semester as and when
offered, along with the Academic Regulations of the Batch into which
she gets readmitted. However, no Grade Allotments or SGPA/ CGPA
calculations shall be done for that entire semester in which she got
detained.
8.10 When a student is detained due to lack of Credits in any year, she may
be readmitted in the next year(s), after the fulfilment of the Academic
Requirements, along with the Academic Regulations of the Batch into
which she gets readmitted.
8.11 A student who is eligible to appear for the End Semester Examination
in any Subject/ Course, but is absent for a particular Subject/Course
or has failed (failing to secure C Grade or above), may reappear for
that Subject/ Course at the supplementary examination (SEE) as and
when conducted. In such cases, her Internal Marks (CIE) assessed
earlier for that Subject/Course shall be retained and carried over, and
added to the marks to be obtained in the SEE supplementary
examination for evaluating her performance in that Subject.
9.0 Evaluation - Distribution and Weightage of Marks
9.1 The performance of a student in each semester shall be evaluated
Subject-wise (irrespective of the Credits assigned) with a maximum
of 100 marks for Theory, or Labs/ Practicals, or Engineering Graphics/
Engineering Drawing, or Elective Course, or Mini-Projects, or
Seminar, or Project – I (Phase – I), or Project – II (Phase – II) etc.
These evaluations shall be based on 40% CIE (Continuous Internal
Evaluation) and 60% SEE (Semester End Examination) basis, and a
Letter Grade corresponding to the % of marks obtained shall be given.
9.2 For all the Subjects/ Courses as mentioned under 9.1, the distribution
shall be: 40 Marks for the CIE and 60 Marks for the SEE for the entire
UG Degree Programme.
9.3 a) For the Theory Subjects during the semester, the CIE assessment
for 40 marks includes two Mid-Term Examinations. Each Mid-Term
Examination is conducted for 30 marks, for a duration of 120
minutes, and it shall have two parts:  i) Part-A (Objective/Quiz
Paper) for 10 marks, and ii) Part-B (Descriptive Paper) for 20 marks.
Average of these two Mid-Term Examinations is assessed for 30
marks.2022-2023 13
The Objective/Quiz Paper is set with ten multiple choice/ fill-in
the blanks/ match the following … type of questions for a total of
10 marks. The Descriptive Paper (for 20 marks) shall contain 6 full
questions, out of which, the student has to answer 4 questions, each
carrying 5 marks.
The remaining 10 marks of CIE are distributed as - i) 5 marks for
Assignment (average of 2 Assignments submitted, each for 5
marks), and ii) 5 marks for - Subject Viva-voce/ PPT/ Poster
Presentation/ Case Study on a topic in the concerned subject.
b) The first mid-term examination shall be conducted in the middle of
the semester for the first 50% of the syllabus, and the second mid-
term examination shall be conducted at the end of the semester for
the remaining 50% of the syllabus.
c) There shall be 2 Assignments per semester, and 5 marks are allocated
for each Assignment. The First Assignment should be submitted
before the conduct of the first mid-term examination, and the Second
Assignment should be submitted before the conduct of the second
mid-term examination. The Assignments shall be as specified by
the concerned subject teacher, and the Average of these two
Assignments shall be taken into account for 5 marks.
d) Assessment (for 5 marks) for the Subject Viva-voce/ Poster
Presentation/ Case Study on a topic in the subject concerned shall
be carried out before the commencement of II Mid-Term
Examinations.
e) Sum of these three components of marks - (i) Average of the two
Mid-Term Examinations marks (for 30 marks), (ii) Average of the
two Assignments marks (for 5 marks), and (iii) the Assessment for
the Subject Viva-voce/ Poster Presentation/ Case Study on a topic
in the subject concerned (for 5 marks) – shall be the final marks
secured towards the CIE (40 marks) in that Subject/ Course. The
student has to earn a minimum of 35 % (14 marks) out of these 40
marks allocated.
l The Student, in each subject, shall have to earn 35% of marks (i.e.
14 marks out of 40 marks) in CIE, 35% of marks (i.e. 21 marks out
of 60) in SEE and Over all 40% of marks (i.e. 40 marks out of 100
marks) both CIE and SEE marks put together.
l The student is eligible to write Semester End Examination of the
concerned subject, if the student scores 
 35% (14 marks) of 40
Continuous Internal Examination (CIE) marks.
l In case, the student appears for Semester End Examination (SEE)
of the concerned subject but not scored minimum 35% of CIE marks
(14 marks out of 40 internal marks), his performance in that subject
in SEE shall stand cancelled inspite of appearing the SEE14 Computer Science and Engineering
l Special internal(Mid) examinations will not be conducted for the
absent students in R22 academic regulations
f) 60 marks are allocated for Semester End Examination (SEE), which
is of 3 hours duration. The SEE Question Paper will have two parts:
i) Part-A is for 10 marks and is compulsory - it consists of 10
questions of 1 marks each (Two questions from each unit) and ii)
Part-B is for 50 marks – it consists of 5 questions of 10 marks each
(one question from each unit, it may contain sub-questions); for
each question there will be ‘either/ or’ choice, which means that
there will be two questions from each unit and the student should
answer one of these two.
9.4 For the Lab/Practical Subjects also, the Continuous Internal Evaluation
(CIE) during the semester shall be for 40 Marks, and the End Semester
Examination (SEE) shall be for 60 Marks. Out of the 40 Marks for
internals (CIE), day-to-day assessment of the lab work shall be judged
for 20 Marks; and one internal lab exam shall be conducted by the
laboratory teacher concerned for 20 Marks, out of which 10 Marks
are allocated for the viva-voce. The Semester End Examination (SEE)
for Lab/Practical’s shall be conducted at the end of the semester by
Two Examiners nominated by the Head of the Department and
approved by the Principal.
l The Student, in each subject, shall have to earn 35% of marks (i.e.
14 marks out of 40 marks) in CIE, 35% of marks (i.e. 21 marks out
of 60) in SEE and Over all 40%of marks (i.e. 40 marks out of 100
marks) both CIE and SEE marks put together.
l The student is eligible to write Semester End Examination of the
concerned subject, if the student scores 
 35% (14 marks) of 40
Continuous Internal Examination (CIE) marks.
l In case, the student appears for Semester End Examination (SEE)
of the concerned subject but not scored minimum 35% of CIE marks
(14 marks out of 40 internal marks), his performance in that subject
in SEE shall stand cancelled inspite of appearing the SEE
9.5 For the Subjects with Design and/or Drawing, (such as Engineering
Graphics, Engineering Drawing, Machine Drawing, Production
Drawing Practice, and Estimation etc.), the distribution shall be: 40
Marks for CIE (20 Marks for the day-to-day work and 20 Marks for
the internal test) and 60 Marks for SEE. There shall be TWO internal
tests in a semester and the A VERAGE of the two shall be taken into
consideration for the award of Marks from the internal tests for CIE.
In case of Drawing SEE (Semester End Examination) question paper
there is no compulsory part(Part-A). Drawing will have only one part
with either or type pattern. Two questions from each unit will be given,2022-2023 15
students has to answer one question from each unit and carries 12
marks.
9.6 Open Electives (OE):  3 Open Elective Courses shall be offered in the
8 Semester UG Degree Programme. Students are to choose each Open
Elective, from the set of options given, in 3 different semesters (in III
and IV Years). The students have to choose three Open Electives (OE1,
OE2, OE3) from the list of Open Electives given by other departments.
However, the student can opt for an Open Elective subject offered by
her own (parent) department, if she has not registered that subject
under any category (Professional Core, Professional Electives,
Mandatory Courses etc.) offered by parent department in any semester.
Open Elective subjects already studied should not repeat/should not
match with any category (Professional Core, Professional Electives,
Mandatory Courses etc.) of subjects even in the forthcoming semesters.
9.7 There shall be a Seminar Presentation in the IV Year II Semester. For
the Seminar, the student shall collect the information on a technical
topic, prepare a Technical Report and submit the Technical Report to
the Department at the time of Seminar Presentation. The Seminar
Presentation (along with the Technical Report submitted) shall be
evaluated for 100 marks by Two Faculty Members assigned by the
Head of the Department. There shall be no SEE or external examination
for the Seminar.
9.8 a) There shall be two Mini-Projects – first one (Mini-Project 1 or
MP1) will be during II Year II Semester (also termed Real Time
Project, based on Laboratory Experiments and Teachers’ advice);
and the second one (Mini-Project 2 or MP2) is preferably in
collaboration with an Industry with the relevant specialization
(Industry Oriented Mini-Project), to be registered immediately after
II Year II Semester examinations, and taken up during the summer
vacation (between II and III Years) for about eight weeks duration.
Students also have an option to choose Industry Internship (instead
of Industry Oriented Mini-Project) for MP2, if they secure selection
at any reputed Industry.
b) The Mini-Project Work shall be submitted in a Report form, and a
presentation of the same shall be made before a Committee, which
is evaluated for 100 marks by the Committee. The Committee shall
consist of - 1) Head of the Department (for MP2) / a Professor of
the Department (for MP1), 2) the Supervisor of Mini-Project, and
3) External Examiner (for MP2) / a Senior Faculty Member of the
Department (for MP1). There shall be no internal marks for Mini-
Projects. Performance evaluation of MP1 and MP2 shall be
included in the II Year II Semester Grade Card and III Year II
Semester Grade Card, respectively. The External Examiner for MP216 Computer Science and Engineering
shall be nominated by the Principal from the panel of 3 names of
external faculty members (Professors or Associate Professors
outside the College) submitted by the Head of Department.
Performance Evaluations of MP1 and MP2 Mini-Projects will be
included in the II Year – II Semester, and III Year – II Semester
Grade Cards, respectively.
c) Industry Internship (for MP2, in place of collaborative Mini-
Project) is exclusively meant for those students who have been
considered eligible and selected accordingly by the Industry. Based
on such selection letters from Industry, approvals will be given to
students by the Principal of the Institution to carry out the Industry
Internship for the specified period. The work performed during
the Internship and the outcomes shall be reported in a Report form,
which will also be evaluated in the same format (same as that of
MP2 as stated in 9.8 b above).
9.9 Each student shall start the Project Work during the IV Year I Semester
as per the instructions of the Project Guide/ Project Supervisor assigned
by the Head of the Department.
a) The Project Work shall be divided and carried out in 2 phases:
Phase – I (Project - I) during IV Year I Semester, and Phase – II
(Project - II) during IV Year II Semester, and the student has to
prepare two independent Project Work Reports – one each during
each phase . First Report shall include the Project Work carried
out under Phase – I, and the Second Report (Final Report) shall
include the Project Work carried out under Phase – I and Phase –
II put together. Phase – I and Phase – II of the Project Work shall
be evaluated for 100 marks each.
b) Out of the total 100 marks allotted for each Phase of the Project
Work, 40 marks shall be for the CIE (Continuous Internal
Evaluation/CIE), and 60 marks shall be for the End Semester Viva-
voce Examination (SEE). The marks earned under CIE for both
Phases of the Project shall be awarded by the Project Guide/
Supervisor, based on the continuous evaluation of student’s
performance and her presentations at the Project Review
Committee (PRC) Meetings in the Department, during the two
Project Work Phases/periods. The PRC shall be constituted by the
Head of the Department, and shall consist of the Head of the
Department (HoD), Project Supervisor, and a Senior Faculty
Member of the Department. The PRC shall monitor and review
the progress of the Project Work, based on the PRC presentations
and performance evaluations. The marks earned under SEE shall
be awarded by the Project Viva-voce Committee/ Board (based on
the work carried out, report prepared and the presentation made2022-2023 17
by the student at the time of Viva-voce Examination).
c) For the Project Phase - I, the Viva-voce shall be conducted at the
end of the IV Year I Semester, before the commencement of the
Semester End Examinations, at the Department Level by the Project
(Phase – I) Evaluation Committee comprising of HoD or One
Professor (nominated by the HoD), Supervisor (no External
Examiner).
d) For the Project Phase – II Viva-voce (or Final Project Viva-voce)
shall be conducted by a Project (Phase -II) Evaluation Committee
comprising of an External Examiner, HoD and the Project
Supervisor at the end of the IV Year II Semester, before the
commencement of the Semester End Examinations. The External
Examiner shall be nominated by the Principal from the panel of 3
names of external faculty members (Professors or Associate
Professors outside the College) submitted by the HoD.
e) The student would be treated as failed, if she - (i) does not submit
a Report on her Projects (Phase – I or Phase – II), or does not
make a presentation of the same before the Evaluation Committee
as per specified schedule, or (ii) secures less than 40% of marks
(that is, 40 marks) in the sum total of the CIE and SEE taken
together, in her Projects evaluations. She may reappear once for
each of the Projects evaluations, as and when they are scheduled
again; if she fails in such ‘one reappearance’ evaluation also, she
has to reappear for the same in the next subsequent semester, as
and when they are scheduled, as supplementary candidate.
9.10 For the Mandatory Non-Credit Course offered in a semester, a
‘Satisfactory grade letter(s)” will be awarded in Grade Memo only
after securing 75% attendance in the Course.
9.11 ONLINE Courses (OL) – offered on MOOCs platform (by NPTEL/
IITs):  Provision is made to offer some identified Courses, PEs and
OEs (or their nearest equivalent courses, along with the number of
credits and period of duration, as notified by the HoD) over ‘ONLINE’
mode, in addition to the conventional ‘OFFLINE’ mode (regular class-
room teaching), from III Year onwards. Students may choose any mode
out of these two, within one week from the commencement of the
current semester; however, for ONLINE mode choice, prior intimation
and approval from the Head of the Department and Principal is
necessary. If any student wishes to discontinue the ONLINE mode,
she can switch back to OFFLINE mode with prior intimation to the
Head of Department, preferably within 2 weeks from the beginning
of the current semester. Prior to Registration of these ONLINE Courses
(on MOOCS platform – offered by NPTEL/IITs), formal approval of
the Courses by JNTUH is essential. On successful completion of the18 Computer Science and Engineering
ONLINE Course, the performance Grade – based on the certification
from the ‘MOOCS Course Conducting Authorities’ (NPTEL/IITs),
will be appropriately awarded to the student and the same will be
recorded on her Grade Card.
9.12  a)  student can re-register for subjects in a semester:
l If the internal marks secured by a student in the Continuous
Internal Evaluation marks for 40 (Sum of average of two mid-
term examinations consisting of Objective & descriptive parts,
Average of two Assignments & Subject Vivavoce/PPT/ Poster
presentation/ Case Study on a topic in the concerned subject)
are less than 35% and failed in those subjects.
They may seek re-registration for all those subjects registered in
that semester in which the student is failed. The student has to
re-appear for CIE and SEE as and when offered.
  A student must re-register for the failed subject(s) for 40 marks
within four weeks of commencement of the   classwork in next
academic year. His Continuous Internal Evaluation marks for
40 obtained in the previous attempt stand cancelled. The student
has to obtain fresh set of marks for 40 allotted for CIE (Sum of
average of two mid-term examinations consisting of Objective &
descriptive parts, Average of two Assignments & Subject Viva-
voce/PPT/ Poster presentation/ Case Study on a topic in the
concerned subject). Head of the Dept. will take care of this
10.0    Grading Procedure
10.1 Marks shall be awarded to indicate the performance of each student
in each Theory Subject, or Lab/Practical, or Workshop/Drawing, or
Elective Course, or Seminar, or Project, or Mini-Project, etc., and,
based on the % of marks obtained in CIE + SEE (Continuous Internal
Evaluation + Semester End Examination, both taken together) as
specified under 9.0, a corresponding Letter Grade shall be given.
10.2 As a measure of the student’s performance, a 10-point Absolute
Grading System using the following (Table 10.2) ‘Letter Grades and
corresponding percentage of marks’ shall be followed:
% of Marks Secured Letter Grade Grade Points
(Class Intervals) (UGC Guidelines)
90% and above O 10
(  90% , 
100% ) (Outstanding)
Below 90% but not less than 80% A + 9
(  80% , < 90% ) (Excellent)
Below 80% but not less than 70% A 8
(  70% , < 80% ) (Very Good)2022-2023 19
Below 70% but not less than 60% B + 7
(  60% , < 70% ) (Good)
Below 60% but not less than 50% B 6
(  50% , < 60% ) (above Average)
Below 50% but not less than 40% C 5
(  40% , < 50% ) (Pass)
Below 40% F 0
( < 40% ) (FAIL)
Table 10.2
10.3      The Grade Designations include 7 categories, namely … O, A+, A,
B+, B, C and F.
10.3.1 A student obtaining F Grade in any Subject shall be considered
‘FAILED’ and will be required to reappear as ‘Supplementary
Candidate’ in the End Semester Examination (SEE), as and when
conducted later. In such cases, her Internal Marks (CIE Marks) in
those Subject(s) will remain the same as those obtained earlier.
10.3.2 If a student fails to appear for SEE of any Subject (s) for any reason
whatsoever, she is deemed to have ‘failed’, and she will get F Grade
in all such failed Subject (s). She will be required to reappear as
‘Supplementary Candidate’ in the End Semester Examination (SEE),
as and when conducted later. In these cases also, her Internal Marks
(CIE Marks) in those Subject(s) will remain the same as those
obtained earlier.
10.4 A Letter Grade does not imply any specific % of marks.
10.5 In general, a student shall not be permitted to repeat any Subject/
Course (s) for the sake of ‘Grade Improvement’ or ‘SGPA/ CGPA
Improvement’. However, she has to repeat all the Subjects/Courses
pertaining to that semester, when she is detained (as listed under
Clauses 8.9- 8.10).
10.6 A student earns Grade Points (GP) in each Subject/ Course on the
basis of the Letter Grade obtained by her in that Subject/Course
(excluding Mandatory non-credit Courses). Then the corresponding
‘Credit Points’ (CP) are computed by multiplying the Grade Point
with Credits for that particular Subject/Course.
Credit Points (CP) = Grade Points (GP) x Credits - for a Course
10.7 The student passes the Subject/ Course only when she gets GP  5
(C Grade or above).
10.8 The Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) is calculated by dividing
the Sum of Credit Points (SCP) secured from ALL Subjects/ Courses
registered in a semester by the Total Number of Credits registered
during that semester. SGPA is rounded off to TWO Decimal Places.
SGPA is thus computed as20 Computer Science and Engineering
SGPA = 
  …. for each semester
where ‘i’ is the Subject indicator index (takes into account all
Subjects in a semester), ‘N’ is the no. of Subjects ‘REGISTERED’
for the semester (as specifically required and listed under the
Course Structure of the parent Department), 
 is the no. of Credits
allotted to the ith Subject, and 
  represents the Grade Points (GP)
corresponding to the Letter Grade awarded for that ith Subject.
10.9 The Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) is a measure of the
overall cumulative performance of a student over all the semesters
considered for registration. The CGPA is the ratio of the Total Credit
Points secured by a student in ALL the registered Courses in ALL the
semesters, and the Total Number of Credits registered in ALL the
semesters. CGPA is rounded off to TWO Decimal Places. CGPA is
thus computed from the I Year Second Semester onwards at the end
of each semester as per the formula
CGPA 
 … for all S semesters registered
(ie., upto and inclusive of S semesters, S ³ 2 ) ,
where ‘M’ is the TOTAL no. of Subjects (as specifically required and
listed under the Course Structure of the parent Department) the student
has ‘REGISTERED’ from the 1st Semester onwards upto and inclusive
of the semester S ( obviously M > N ), ‘j’ is the Subject indicator
index (takes into account all Subjects from 1 to S semesters), 
  is the
no. of Credits allotted to the jth Subject, and 
 represents the Grade
Points (GP) corresponding to the Letter Grade awarded for that j th
Subject. After the registration and completion of I Year I Semester
however, the SGPA of that semester itself may be taken as the CGPA,
as there are no cumulative effects.
10.10 For the Merit Ranking or Comparison Purposes or any other listing,
ONLY the ‘ROUNDED OFF’ values of the CGPAs shall be used.
10.11 SGPA of a semester will be mentioned in the Semester Grade Card or
Grades Memorandum, if all the subjects of that semester are passed in
first attempt. Otherwise, the SGPA  shall be mentioned on the Grade
Card, only when the student passes all subjects of that semester.
10.12 Passing Standards
10.12.1  A student shall be declared successful or ‘passed’ in a semester, only
when she gets a SGPA 5.00 (at the end of that particular semester);
and a student shall be declared successful or ‘passed’ in the entire UG
Degree Course, only when she gets a CGPA 5.00; subject to the
condition that she secures a GP  5 (C Grade or above) in every2022-2023 21
registered Subject/ Course in each semester (during the entire UG
Degree Course) for the Award of the Degree, as required.
10.12.2 A student shall be declared successful or ‘passed’ in any Non-Credit
Subject/ Course, if she secures a ‘Satisfactory grade’ for that Mandatory
Course.
10.13 After the completion of each semester, a Grade Card or Grade Sheet
(or Transcript) shall be issued to all the Registered Students of that
semester indicating the Letter Grades and the Credits earned. The Grade
Card or the Grade Sheet shall show the details of the Courses
Registered (Course Code, Title, No. of Credits, Grade Earned etc.),
Credits earned, SGPA.
11.0 Declaration of Results
a. Computation of SGPA and CGPA are done using the procedure
listed under Clauses 10.6 – 10.10.
b.  CGPA is NOT indicative of the % of marks secured. However, in
case if % of marks equivalent to the FINAL CGPA  (computed at
the end of UG Degree Programme) is required, then the following
formula may be used as an estimate.
% of Marks = (final CGPA – 0.5) x 10
12.0 Award of Degree
12.1 a) A student who registers for all the specified Subjects/ Courses as
listed in the Course Structure, satisfies all the Course Requirements,
and passes all the examinations prescribed in the entire UG Degree
Programme, and secures the required number of 160 Credits (with
Final CGPA 5.0), within 8 Academic Years from the Date of
Commencement of the First Academic Year, shall be declared to
have ‘QUALIFIED’ for the Award of the B.Tech. Degree in the
chosen Branch of Engineering as selected at the time of Admission.
b) B.Tech. with Honors/ Minor Degree shall be awarded by JNTUH
to those successful and acquired 20 Credits (for Honors) and 18
Credits (for Minors) in addition to the stipulated 160 Credits for
B.Tech. Degree, as per norms listed Clause 8.7 and Annexures
H-M.
12.2 A student who qualifies for the Award of the Degree as listed under
Clause 12.1, shall be placed in the following Classes (Table 12.2):
AWARD OF CLASS BASED ON FINAL CGPA
(at the end of the UG Degree Programme)
First Class with Distinction Final CGPA 8.00 or more ##
First Class Final CGPA below 8.00 but not less than 7.00
Second Class Final CGPA below 7.00 but not less than 6.00
Pass Class Final CGPA below 6.00 but not less than 5.00
Table 12.222 Computer Science and Engineering
## Note:
a) A student with Final CGPA (at the end of the UG Degree Programme)
 8.00, and fulfilling the following conditions -
i) should have passed all the Subjects/ Courses within the first
4 Academic Years (or 8 Sequential Semesters) from the Date of
Commencement of her First Academic Year,
ii) should not have been detained or prevented from writing the End
Semester Examinations in any semester due to shortage of
attendance or any other reason, shall be placed in ‘FIRST CLASS
with DISTINCTION’.
A student fulfilling the conditions listed under (a) above,alone will be
the eligible candidate for the ‘University/College Rank’ and/or ‘Gold
Medal’ considerations.
b) A student with Final CGPA (at the end of UG Degree Programme)
 8.00, but not fulfilling the above conditions, shall be placed in ‘FIRST
CLASS’.
c) A student with Final CGPA (at the end of the UG Degree Programme)
< 5.00 will not be eligible for the Award of the Degree.
12.3 Award of 2-Year Diploma Certificate
1. A student is awarded 2-Year UG Diploma Certificate in the concerned
engineering branch on completion of all the academic requirements
and earned all the 80 credits (within 4 years from the date of admission)
upto B.Tech. II Year II Semester, if the student want to exit the 4-Year
B.Tech. program and requests for the 2 -Year B. Tech. (UG) Diploma
Certificate.
2. The student once opted and awarded 2-Year UG Diploma Certificate,
the student will be permitted to join in B. Tech. III Year I Semester
and continue for completion of remaining years of study for 4-Year
B. Tech. Degree ONLY in the next academic year along with next
batch students. However, if any student wishes to continue the study
after opting for exit, he/she should register for the subjects/courses in
III Year I Semester before commencement of classwork for that
semester.
3. The students, who exit the 4-Year B. Tech. program after II Year of
study and wish to re-join the B.Tech. program, must submit the
2 -Year B. Tech. (UG) Diploma Certificate awarded to him, subject to
the eligibility for completion of Course/Degree.
4. A student may be permitted to take one year break after completion of
II Year II Semester or B. Tech. III Year II Semester (with university
permission through the principal of the college well in advance) and
can re-enter the course in next Academic Year in the same college and
complete the course on fulfilling all the academic credentials within a2022-2023 23
stipulated duration i.e. double the duration of the course (Ex. within
8 Years for 4-Year program)
13.0  Withholding of Results
13.1     If the student has not paid fees to the University/ College at any stage,
or has pending dues against her name due to any reason whatsoever,
or if any case of indiscipline is pending against her, the result of the
student may be withheld, and she shall not be allowed to go into the
next higher semester. The award or issue of the Degree may also be
withheld in such cases.
14.0  Transitory Regulations
A. For students detained due to shortage of attendance:
1. A student who has been detained in any semester of I, II, III and
IV years of R18 regulations for want of attendance, shall be
permitted to join the corresponding semester of R22 Regulations
and is required to complete the study of B.Tech. within the
stipulated period of eight academic years from the date of first
admission in I Year. The R22 Academic Regulations under which
a student has been readmitted shall be applicable to that student
from thatsemester. See rule (C) for further Transitory Regulations.
B. For students detained due to shortage of credits:
1. A student of R18 Regulations who has been detained due to lack
of credits, shall be promoted to the next semester of R22
Regulations only after acquiring the required number of credits as
per the corresponding regulations of his/her first admission. The
total credits required are 160 including both R18 & R22 regulations.
The student is required to complete the study of B.Tech. within
the stipulated period of eight academic years from the year of first
admission. The R22 Academic Regulations are applicable to a
student from the year of readmission. See rule (C) for further
Transitory Regulations.
C. For readmitted students in R22 Regulations:
1. A student who has failed in any subject under any regulation has
to pass those subjects in the same regulations.
2. The maximum credits that a student acquires for the award of
degree, shall be the sum of the total number of credits secured in
all the regulations of his/her study including R22 Regulations.
There is NO exemption of credits in any case.
3.  If a student is readmitted to R22 Regulations and has any subject
with 80% of syllabus common with his/her previous regulations,
that particular subject in R22 Regulations will be substituted by
another subject to be suggested by the University.24 Computer Science and Engineering
Note: If a student readmitted to R22 Regulations and has not studied any
subjects/topics in his/her earlier regulations of study which is
prerequisite for further subjects in R22 Regulations, the College
Principals concerned shall conduct remedial classes to cover those
subjects/topics for the benefit of the students.
15.0 Student Transfers
15.1 There shall be no Branch transfers after the completion of the
Admission Process.
16.0    Scope
i) Where the words “Subject” or “Subjects”, occur in these
regulations, they also imply “Course” or “Courses”.
ii) The Academic Regulations should be read as a whole, for the
purpose of any interpretation.
iii) In case of any doubt or ambiguity in the interpretation of the above
rules, the decision of the Principal is final.
iv) The College may change or amend the Academic Regulations,
Course Structure or Syllabi at any time, and the changes or
amendments made shall be applicable to all the students with effect
from the dates notified by the College Authorities.
T2022-2023 25
ANNEXURE - H:
H1) JNTUH stipulated Regulations for B.Tech. Degree Course with
Honors:
H1.1 Academic Regulations:
a) The weekly instruction hours, internal & external evaluation and
award of grades are on par with regular 4-Years B. Tech. program.
b) For B. Tech with Honors program, a student needs to earn additional
20 credits (over and above the required 160 credits for B. Tech
degree). The broad guidelines for the courses of Honors program,
their respective credits weightage and semester-wise break-up of
the course are enclosed below in Clause H1.4. All these 20 credits
need to be completed in III year and IV year only.
c) After registering for the Honors program, if a student is unable to
pass all courses in first attempt and earn the required 20 credits,
she shall not be awarded Honors degree. However, if the student
earns all the required 160 credits of B. Tech., she will be awarded
only B. Tech degree in the concerned branch.
d) There is no transfer of credits from courses of Honors program to
regular B. Tech. degree course & vice versa.
e) These 20 credits are to be earned from the additional courses offered
by the host department in the college or from a closely related
departments in the college as well as from the MOOCS platform.
f) For the courses selected under MOOCS platform following
guidelines may be followed:
i) Prior to registration of MOOCS courses, formal approval of
the courses, by the University is essential. University before
the issue of approval considers the parameters like the institute
/ agency which is offering the course, syllabus, credits, duration
of the programme and mode of evaluation etc.
ii) Minimum credits for a MOOCS course must be equal to or
more than the credits specified in the Honors course structure
provided by the University.
iii) Only Pass-grade/marks or above shall be considered for
inclusion of grades in the Honors grade memo.
iv) Any expenses incurred for the MOOCS courses are to be met
by the students only.
g) The choice to opt/take the Honors program is purely on the choice
of the students.
h) The student shall be given a choice of withdrawing all the courses
registered and/or the credits earned for Honors program at any26 Computer Science and Engineering
time; and in that case the student will be awarded only B. Tech.
degree in the concerned branch on earning the required credits of
160.
i) The students of every branch can choose Honors program in
their respective branches if they are eligible for the Honors
program. A student who chooses an Honors program is not
eligible to choose a Minor program and vice-versa.
j) The B. Tech. with Honors program shall be offered at GNITS (W)
from the AY 2022-23 onwards. The students who are pursuing
their III year I semester in the current academic year can register
for the Honors program if they fulfil the eligibility criteria.
k) A student can graduate with Honors if she fulfils the requirements
for her regular B. Tech. program as well as fulfils the requirements
for Honors program.
l) The institute shall maintain a record of students registered and
pursuing their Honors programs branch-wise. The same report
needs to be sent to the University once the enrolment process is
complete.
m) The department shall prepare the time-tables for each Honors
program offered at their respective departments without any
overlap/clash with other courses of study in the respective
semesters.
H1.2 Eligibility conditions of the students for the Honors degree :
a) A student can opt for B.Tech. degree with Honors, if she passed
all subjects in first attempt in all the semesters till the results
announced and maintaining 7.5 or more CGPA.
b) If a student fails in any registered course of either B. Tech. or
Honors in any semester of four years program, she will not be
eligible for obtaining Honors Degree. She will be eligible for only
B. Tech. degree.
c) Prior approval of mentor and Head of the Department for the
enrolment into Honors program, before commencement of III year
I Semester (V Semester), is mandatory.
d) If more than 30% of the students in a branch fulfil the eligibility
criteria (as stated above), the number of students given eligibility
should be limited to 30%. The criteria to be followed for choosing
30% candidates in a branch may be the CGPA secured by the
students till II year I semester.
e) The department concerned should be preferably NBA accredited
and shall offer at least one M. Tech. Program.2022-2023 27
f) Successful completion of 20 credits earmarked for Honors program
with atleast 7.5 CGPA along with successful completion of 160
credits earmarked for regular B. Tech. Program with at least 7.5
CGPA and passing all subjects in first attempt gives the eligibility
for the award of B. Tech. (Honors) degree.
g) For CGPA calculation of B. Tech. course, the 20 credits of Honors
program will not be considered.
H1.3 Registration for the course in Honors Program:
a) At the beginning of each semester, just before the commencement
of classes, students shall register for the courses which they wish
to take in that semester.
b) The students should choose a course from the list against each
semester (from Honors course structure) other than the courses
they have studied/registered for regular B.Tech. programme. No
course should be identical to that of the regular B. Tech. course.
The students should take the advice of faculty mentors while
registering for a course at the beginning of semester.
c) The maximum No. of courses for the Honors is limited to two
(three in case of inclusion of lab) in a semester along with regular
semester courses.
d) The registration fee to be collected from the students by the College
is Rs. 1000/- per one credit.
e) A fee for late registration may be imposed as per the norms.
H1.4 Academic Regulations/ Course Structure for Honors degree in
B. Tech. Programs (Table H1.4):
S. Year/ Course to be Mode of No. of
No. Semester  Chosen From/ Studied Learning Credits
1 III-1 PE1 OR PE2 Blended/ Conventional 3
2 III-2 Research Methodologies Conventional 3
3 III-2 PE3 Conventional 3
4 IV-1 PE4 Conventional 3
5 IV-1 PE5 Conventional 3
6 IV-2 Technical Paper Writing Under the Mentorship
of a Supervisor 2
7 IV-2 PE6 or an Inter- MOOCS 3
disciplinary Subject as
suggested by University
TOTAL CREDITS 20
Table: H1.428 Computer Science and Engineering
Notes:
A) Professional Elective (PE) course should be selected (which is not
studied) from each Professional Electives list provided in regular B.
Tech. course.
B) Courses can be chosen as in above table.
C) Technical paper writing:
a) The student shall take up a problem/topic of engineering branches
(inter-disciplinary nature) and apply the knowledge which she
acquired while pursuing their engineering branch. It is expected
to analyse, design and develop an application for the identified
problem and write a technical paper/document.
Alternatively, the student - i) shall identify a research topic, analyse
the problem, carryout the experiments, write a technical paper and
publish in /communicate for a Scopus indexed journal/any journal
with decent reputation, or ii) demonstrate a talent/an idea/
development of an innovative product.
b) The evaluation shall be done by the same committee which is
constituted for project evaluation, along with the final semester
project work.
c) The students should start exploration for the Technical Paper
Writing immediately after the semester exams of III-II semester.
Only the evaluation part shall be carried in IV-II semester.
D) The institute shall offer a course on Research Methodologies by
combining the students of all branches (if the number of students is
more, multiple parallel sessions may be conducted). The time slots in
the time-tables of respective branches should be aligned. The external
evaluation of Research Methodologies course shall be done by the
University.
E) If the blended course option is chosen, for the subject in III-I semester,
the learning should be partially in online mode and partially in offline
mode. The external evaluation shall be done by the University;
however, for the internal evaluation component, online assessment
should also be taken into account while finalising the internal marks
by the course teacher.
T2022-2023 29
ANNEXURE - M:
M1) JNTUH stipulated Regulations for B.Tech. Degree Course with
Minors:
M1.1 Minor Courses and the Offering Departments (Table M1.1):
S. Minor Eligible Branches Offering Award of
No. Programme of Students Depart- Degree
ments @
1 Artificial All Branches, except B.Tech. CSE B.Tech. in Branch
Intelligence  in CSE (AI & ML)/ B.Tech. Name with Minor
& Machine (AI & ML)/B.Tech. (AI)  in Artificial
Learning / B.Tech. CSE (AI) Intelligence &
Machine Learning
2 Cyber All Branches, except B.Tech. CSE B.Tech. in Branch
Security in CSE (Cyber Security)/ Name with Minor
B.Tech. (Cyber Security)  in Cyber Security
3 Data All Branches, except B.Tech. CSE B.Tech. in Branch
Science in CSE (Data Science)/ Name with Minor
B.Tech. (Data Science)  in Data Science
4 IOT All Branches, except B.Tech. ECE B.Tech. in Branch
in CSE (IOT)/ B.Tech. (IOT) Name with Minor
in IOT
5 Innovation All Branches Manage- B.Tech. in Branch
and   ment Name with Minor
Entrepre- Science/ in Innovation and
neurship MBA Entrepreneurship
@ as per AICTE guidelines.
Table: M1.1
M1.2 Academic Regulations for B. Tech. Degree with Minor Programs:
a) The weekly instruction hours, internal & external evaluation and
award of grades are on par with regular 4-Years B. Tech. program.
b) For B. Tech. with Minor, a student needs to earn additional 18
credits (over and above the required 160 credits for B. Tech
degree). The list of courses of each Minor program, their
respective credits weightage and semester-wise break-up of the
courses are as specified by JNTUH authorities. All these 18 credits
need to be completed in III year and IV year only.
c) After registering for the Minor programme, if a student is unable
to earn all the required 18 credits in a specified duration (twice
the duration of the course), she shall not be awarded Minor degree.
However, if the student earns all the required 160 credits of30 Computer Science and Engineering
B.Tech., he/she will be awarded only B. Tech degree in the
concerned branch.
d) There is no transfer of credits from Minor program courses to
regular B. Tech. degree course & vice versa.
e) These 18 credits are to be earned from the additional Courses
offered by the host department in the college as well as from the
MOOCS platform.
f) For the course selected under MOOCS platform following
guidelines may be followed:
i) Prior to registration of MOOCS courses, formal approval
of the courses, by the University is essential.  University,
before the issue of approval, considers the parameters like
the Institute / Agency which is offering the course, syllabus,
credits, duration of the programme and mode of evaluation
etc.
ii) Minimum credits for MOOCS course must be equal to or more
than the credits specified in the Minor course structure
provided by the University.
iii) Only Pass-grade/marks or above shall be considered for
inclusion of grades in Minor grade memo.
iv) Any expenses incurred for the MOOCS courses are to be met
by the students only.
g) The choice to opt/take a Minor program is purely on the choice
of the students.
h) The student shall be given a choice of withdrawing all the courses
registered and/or the credits earned for Minor program at any
time; and in that case the student will be awarded only B. Tech.
degree in the concerned branch on earning the required credits of
160.
i) The student can choose only one Minor program along with her
basic engineering degree. A student who chooses an Honors
program is not eligible to choose a Minor program and vice-versa.
j) The B. Tech. with a Minor program shall be offered from the AY
2021-22 onwards. The students who are pursuing their III year I
semester in the current academic year can register for the Minor
program if they fulfil the eligibility criteria.
k) A student can graduate with a Minor if she fulfils the requirements
for her regular B. Tech. program as well as fulfils the requirements
for Minor program.
l) The Institute shall maintain a record of students registered and
pursuing their Minor programs, minor program-wise and parent2022-2023 31
branch-wise. The same report needs to be sent to the University
once the enrolment process is complete.
m) The Institute / Department shall prepare the time-tables for each
Minor course offered at their respective institutes without any
overlap/clash with other courses of study in the respective
semesters.
M1.3 Eligibility conditions for the student to register for Minor Course:
a) A student can opt for B.Tech. degree with Minor program if she/
he has no active backlogs till II Year I Semester (III semester) at
the time of entering into III year I semester.
b) Prior approval of mentor and Head of the Department for the
enrolment into Minor program, before commencement of III year
I Semester (V Semester), is mandatory.
c) If more than 50% of the students in a branch fulfil the eligibility
criteria (as stated above), the number of students given eligibility
should be limited to 50%.
M1.4 Registration for the courses in Minor Program :
a)  At the beginning of each semester, just before the commencement
of classes, students shall register for the courses which they wish
to take in that semester.
b) The students should choose a course from the list against each
semester (from Minors course structure) other than the courses
they have studied/registered for regular B.Tech. programme. No
course should be identical to that of the regular B.Tech course.
The students should take the advice of faculty mentors while
registering for a course at the beginning of semester.
c) The maximum No. of courses for the Minor is limited to two
(three in case of inclusion of lab) in a semester along with regular
semester courses.
d) The registration fee to be collected from the students by the
College is Rs. 1000/- per one credit.
e) A fee for late registration may be imposed as per norms.
T32 Computer Science and Engineering
ACADEMIC REGULATIONS (R22)
For CBCS Based B.Tech. Degree Programmes for Students
Admitted under Lateral Entry Scheme (LES)
(Applicable for the students admitted into II year from the
Academic Year 2023-24 and onwards)
A) Eligibility for Admission ~
A.1 The Admission to the B.Tech. Programme (UG Degree Programme)
shall be made either on the basis of the merit rank obtained by the
qualifying candidate at an Entrance Test conducted by the Telangana
State Government (TSECET), OR the University, OR on the basis
of any other order of merit approved by the University, subject to
the reservations as prescribed by the Government from time to time.
B) B.Tech. Degree Course Structure for LES Students ~
B.1 Regular Full Time B.Tech. Degree Courses at GNITS are of
Semester Pattern, with 8 Semesters constituting 4 Academic Years
and each Academic Year is of TWO Semesters (First/Odd and
Second/Even Semesters). Students admitted under LES shall join -
the II Year stream of the Regular B.Tech. students in the relevant
branch of engineering (admitted for 4 Year UG Degree Programme
in the previous year); and their UGDP period therefore shall be 3
Years (II, III and IV Years) or 6 Semesters of the Regular Full Time
B.Tech. Programme (commencing from II Year I Semester).
B.2 The LES Students, after securing admission, shall pursue their UG
Degree Programme of study for not less than 3 years and not more
than 6 years, from the year of admission.
B.3 Each student shall Register for and secure the specified number of
Credits (120 Credits) required for the completion of the UGDP and
the Award of the B.Tech. Degree in the respective Branch of
Engineering.
C) Academic Requirements ~
C.1 A student will not be promoted from the II Year to the III Year,
unless she fulfills the Attendance and Academic Requirements and
secures a total of 24 Credits out of 40 Credits specified up to and
inclusive of the II Year II Semester, from all the relevant regular
and supplementary examinations, whether she takes those
examinations or not.
C.2 A student will not be promoted from the III Year to the IV Year,
unless she fulfils the Attendance and Academic Requirements and
secures a total of 48 Credits out of 80 Credits specified up to and
inclusive of the III Year II Semester, from all the relevant regular2022-2023 33
and supplementary examinations, whether she takes those
examinations or not.
C.3 A student shall register for all the Subjects covering 120 Credits as
specified and listed (with the relevant Course/ Subject
Classifications as mentioned) in the Course Structure, puts up all
the Attendance and Academic requirements for 120 Credits securing
a minimum of C Grade (Pass Grade) or above in each Subject, and
earns ALL 120 Credits securing SGPA  5.0 ( in each semester),
and CGPA (at the end of each successive semester)  5.0, to
successfully complete the B.Tech. Degree Programme.
C.4 A student who fails to earn 120 Credits specified as per the Course
Structure, and as indicated above, within 6 Academic Years from
the year of admission (that corresponds to the II Year I Semester of
the Regular Full Time B.Tech. Degree Programme), shall forfeit
their seat in B.Tech. Programme and their admission shall stand
cancelled.
D) Award of Degree
D.1 A student who registers for all the specified Subjects/ Courses as
listed in the Course Structure, satisfies all the Course Requirements,
and passes all the examinations prescribed in the entire UG Degree
Programme, and secures the required number of 120 Credits (with
final CGPA  5.0), within 6 Academic Years from the year of
admission, shall be declared to have ‘QUALIFIED’ for the Award
of the B.Tech. Degree in the chosen Branch of Engineering as
selected at the time of Admission.
D.2 A student who qualifies for the Award of the Degree as listed under
Clause D.1, shall be placed in the following Classes (Table D.2):
AWARD OF CLASS BASED ON FINAL CGPA
(at the end of the UG Degree Programme)
First Class with Distinction Final CGPA 8.00 or more ##
First Class Final CGPA below 8.00 but not less than 7.00
Second Class Final CGPA below 7.00 but not less than 6.00
Pass Class Final CGPA below 6.00 but not less than 5.00
Table: D.2
## Note:
a) A student with Final CGPA (at the end of the UG Degree Programme)
 8.00, and fulfilling the following conditions -
i) should have passed all the Subjects/ Courses within the first 3
Academic Years (or 6 Sequential Semesters) from the Year of
Admission,
ii) should not have been detained or prevented from writing the End34 Computer Science and Engineering
Semester Examinations in any semester due to shortage of
attendance or any other reason, shall be placed in ‘FIRST CLASS
with DISTINCTION’.
A student fulfilling the conditions listed under (a) above,alone will be
the eligible candidate for the ‘University/College Rank’ and/or ‘Gold
Medal’ considerations.
b) A student with Final CGPA (at the end of UG Degree Programme)
8.00, but not fulfilling the above conditions, shall be placed in ‘FIRST
CLASS’.
c) A student with Final CGPA (at the end of the UG Degree Programme)
< 5.00 will not be eligible for the Award of the Degree.
E) Other Regulations ~
All the Academic Regulations as applicable for the B.Tech. 4 Year
(Regular) Degree Programme students shall hold good for the B.Tech.
Lateral Entry Scheme students also, but for the variations as described
above, under Clauses A, B, C and D for LES students.
F) LES Students are not eligible for the 2-Year UG Diploma Certificate
(that provision is available for the Regular 4 Year B.Tech. Course
Students only).2022-2023 35
B.Tech. 4 Year (8 semesters) Regular Programme in
MALPRACTICES RULES
DISCIPLINARY ACTION FOR / IMPROPER
CONDUCT IN EXAMINATIONS
Possesses or keeps accessible in
examination hall, any paper, note book,
programmable calculators, cell phones,
pager, palm computers or any other
form of material concerned with or
related to the subject of the
examination (theory or practical) in
which student is appearing but has not
made use of (material shall include any
marks on the body of the student which
can be  used as an aid in the subject of
the examination)
Gives assistance or guidance or
receives it from any other student
orally or by any other body language
methods or communicates through cell
phones with any student or persons in
or outside the exam hall in respect of
any matter.
Has copied in the examination hall
from any paper, book, programmable
calculators, palm computers or  any
other form of material relevant to the
subject of the examination (theory or
practical) in which the student is
appearing.
Expulsion from the examination
hall and cancellation of the
performance in that subject only.
1.
(a)
Nature of Malpractices/Improper
conduct
If the student:
Punishment
(b)
2.
3.
Expulsion from the examination
hall and cancellation of the
performance in that subject only
of all the students involved. In
case of an outsider, he will be
handed over to the police and a
case is registered against him.
Expulsion from the examination
hall and cancellation of the
performance in that subject and
all other subjects the student has
already appeared including
practical examinations and
project work and shall not be
permitted to appear for the
remaining examinations of the
subjects of that semester/year.
Impersonates any other student in
connection with the examination
The  student  who  has   imperso-
nated   shall  beexpelled from
examination hall. The student
isalso debarred and forfeits the
seat. The performance of the
original student who has been36 Computer Science and Engineering
impersonated, shall be cancelled
in all the subjects of the
examination  (including practicals
and project work) already
appeared and shall not be allowed
to appear for examinations of the
remaining subjects of that
semester/year. The student is also
debarred for two consecutive
semesters from class work and all
university examinations. The
continuation of the course by the
student is subject to the academic
regulations in connection with
forfeiture of seat. If the  imposter
is  an outsider, he will be handed
over to the police and a case is
registered against him
Expulsion from the examination
hall and cancellation of
performance in that subject and
all the other subjects the student
has already appeared including
practical examinations and
project work and shall not be
permitted for the remaining
examinations of the subjects of
that semester/year. The student is
also debarred for two consecutive
semesters from class work and all
university examinations. The
continuation of the course by the
student is subject to the academic
regulations in connection with
forfeiture of seat.
4.
Smuggles in the answer book,  takes
out or arranges to send out the question
paper  during the examination or
answer book or additional sheet,
during or after the examination.
Uses objectionable, abusive or
offensive language in the answer
paper or in letters to the examiners or
writes to the examiner requesting him
to award pass marks.
5.
Cancellation of the performance
in that subject.2022-2023 37
Refuses to obey the orders of the
chiefsuperintendent/assistant –
superintendent / any officer on duty or
misbehaves or creates disturbance of
anykind in and around the examination
hall or organizes a walk out or
instigates others to walk out, or
threatens the officer-in charge or any
person on duty in or outside the
examination hall of any injury to his
person or to any of his relations
whether by words, eitherspoken or
written or by signs or by visible
representation, assaults the officer-in-
charge, or any person on duty in or
outside the examination hall or any of
his relations, or indulges in any other
act of misconduct or mischief which
result in damage to or destruction of
property in the examination hall or any
part of the college campus or engages
in any other act which in the opinion
of the officer on duty amounts to use
of unfair means or misconduct or has
the tendency to disrupt the orderly
conduct of the examination.
In case of students of the
college, they shall be expelled
from examination halls and
cancellation of their
performance  in  that subject and
all other subjects the student(s)
has (have) already appeared and
shall not be permitted to appear
for the remaining examinations
of the subjects of that semester/
year. The students also are
debarred and forfeit their seats.
In  case  of  outsiders, they will
be handed over to the police and
a police case is registered
against them.
Expulsion from the examination
hall and cancellation of perfor-
mance in that subject andall the
other subjects the student has
already appeared including prac-
tical examinations andproject
work and shall not be permitted
for theremaining examinations of
the subjects of that semester/year.
The student is also debarred for
two consecutive semesters from
class work andall university
examinations. The continuation of
the course by the student is
subject to the academic
regulations in connection with
forfeiture of seat.
6.
7.
Leaves the exam hall taking
awayanswer script or intentionally
tears  of the script or any part there of
inside oroutside the examination hall.38 Computer Science and Engineering
8. Possess any lethal weapon or firearm
in the examination hall.
If student of the college, who is not a
student for the particular examination
or any person not connected with the
college indulges in any malpractice or
improper conduct mentioned in clause
6 to 8.
Comes in a drunken condition to the
examination hall.
Copying detected on the basis of
internal evidence, such as, during
valuation or during special scrutiny.
Expulsion from the examination
hall andcancellation of the
performance in that subjectand
all  other  subjects  the  student
has already appeared including
practical examinations and
project  work and  shall not be
permitted for the remaining
examinations of the subjects of
that semester/year.The student is
also debarred and forfeits the
seat.
Student of the colleges expulsion
from the examination hall and
cancellation of the performance
in that subject and all other
subjects the student has already
appeared including practical
examinations and project work
and shall not be permitted for the
remaining examinations of the
subjects of that semester/year.
The student is also debarred and
forfeits the seat.Person(s) who do
not belong to the college will be
handed over to police and, a
police case will be registered
against them.
Expulsion    from    the   exami-
nation   hall  and cancellation of
the performance in that subject
and  all  other  subjects  the
student  has already appeared
including practical examinations
and project work and shall not be
permitted for the remaining
examinations of the subjects of
that semester/year
Cancellation of the performance
in that subject and all other
subjects the student has appeared
including practical examinations
and project work of that semester/
year examinations.
9.
10.
11.
If any malpractice is detected which is
not covered in the above clauses 1 to 11
shall be reported to the university for
further action to award suitable
punishm
ent.
12.2022-2023 39
B.Tech. 4 Year (8 semesters) Regular Programme in
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
COURSE STRUCTURE
(Applicable for the Batch admitted from the Academic Year 2022-23)
I YEAR I SEMESTER
S.  Group Subject                         Subject L T P CreditsNo. Code
1 BS 121AG Linear Algebra and Multivariable 310 4Calculus
2 ES 121AH Programming for Problem Solving 3 0 0 3
3 ES 121AC Basic Electrical Engineering 3 0 0 3
4 ES 121AD Design Thinking 2 0 0 2
5 ES 121AE Engineering Graphics 1 0 3 2.5
6 ES 12104 Engineering Workshop 1 0 3 2.5
7 ES 12108 Programming Lab 0 0 3 1.5
8 ES 12103 Basic Electrical Engineering Lab 0 0 3 1.5
9 MC 12106 Environmental Science and 200 -Technology
TOTAL 15 1 12 20
I YEAR II SEMESTER
S.  Group Subject                         Subject L T P CreditsNo. Code
1 BS 122AA Applied Chemistry 3 0 0 3
2 BS 122AB Applied Physics 3 0 0 3
3 HS 122AF English for Skill Enhancement 2 0 0 2
4 BS 122AK Numerical Techniques and 310 4Transform Calculus
5 ES 122AJ Data Structures 3 0 0 3
6 HS 12205 English Language and 002 1Communication Skills Lab
7 BS 12201 Applied Chemistry Lab 0 0 2 1
8 BS 12202 Applied Physics Lab 0 0 3 1.5
9 ES 12209 Data Structures Lab 0 0 3 1.5
10 MC 12207 Gender Sensitization 0 0 2 -
TOTAL 14 1 12 2040 Computer Science and Engineering
II YEAR I SEMESTER
S.  Group Subject                         Subject L T P CreditsNo. Code
1 BS 123AU Probability and Statistics 3 0 0 3
2 PC 123AN Design and Analysis of Algorithms 3 1 0 4
3 PC 123AM Database Management Systems 3 1 0 4
4 ES 123AP Digital Logic Design 3 0 0 3
5 PC 123A V Python Programming 2 0 0 2
6 PC 12313 Database Management Systems Lab 003 1 . 5
7 PC 12317 Python Programming Lab 0 0 2 1
8 ES 12316 IT Workshop Lab 0 0 3 1.5
9 MC 12312 Constitution of India 2 0 0 -
TOTAL 16 2 8 20
II YEAR II SEMESTER
S.  Group Subject                         Subject L T P CreditsNo. Code
1 BS 124BG Discrete Mathematics 3 0 0 3
2 PC 124BK Object Oriented Programming 300 3through JA V A
3 PC 124BL Operating Systems 3 0 0 3
4 PC 124BB Computer Organization and 300 3Architecture
5 PC 124BP Software Engineering 3 0 0 3
6 PC 12425 Object Oriented Programming 003 1 . 5through JA V A Lab
7 PC 12426 Operating Systems and 003 1 . 5Microprocessor Lab
8 PW 12424 Mini Project-1 (Real Time Project) 0 0 4 2
9 MC 12422 Human Values and Professional 2 0 0 -
Ethics
TOTAL 17 0 10 20
B.Tech. 4 Year (8 semesters) Regular Programme in
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
COURSE STRUCTURE
(Applicable for the Batch admitted from the Academic Year 2022-23)2022-2023 41
III YEAR I SEMESTER
S.  Group Subject                         Subject L T P CreditsNo. Code
1 PC 125CN Full Stack Development 3 1 0 4
2 PC 125CD Computer Networks 3 0 0 3
3 PC 125CX Machine Learning 3 0 0 3
Professional  Elective–1(Offline/Online)
125BR Advanced Computer Architecture
4 PE1 125CE Data Mining 3 0 0 3
125CC Computer Graphics
125BA Artificial Intelligence
Professional Elective-2(Offline/Online)
125DD Principles of  Programming  Languages
5 PE2 125EQ Software Testing Methodologies 3 0 0 3
125CA Cloud Computing
125CJ Distributed Systems
6 PC 12533 Full Stack Development Lab 0 0 3 1.5
7 PC 12531 Computer Networks Lab 0 0 3 1.5
8 PC 12534 Machine Learning Lab 0 0 2 1
TOTAL 15 1 8 20
III YEAR II SEMESTER
S.  Group Subject                         Subject L T P CreditsNo. Code
1 HS 126EG Managerial Economics and 300 3Financial Analysis
2 PC 126BW Automata and Complier Design 3 0 0 3
3 PC 126DR Computer Vision and Pattern 310 4Recognition
4 PE3
Professional Elective-3 (Offline/Online)
300 3
126CS Information Retrieval Systems
126DH Soft Computing
126EQ Agile Methodology
126DY Graph Theory
5 OE1 Open Elective-1 (Offline/Online) 300 3
6 PC 12638 Computer Vision and Pattern 002 1Recognition Lab
7 HS 12628 Advanced Communication Skills Lab 002 1
8 PW 12644
Mini Project-2 Industry Oriented
004 2Mini Project/ Industry
Internship- During Summer
between 2nd and 3rd years
TOTAL 15 1 8 20
B.Tech. 4 Year (8 semesters) Regular Programme in
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
COURSE STRUCTURE
(Applicable for the Batch admitted from the Academic Year 2022-23)42 Computer Science and Engineering
IV YEAR I SEMESTER
S.  Group Subject                         Subject L T P CreditsNo. Code
1 HS 127FN Fundamentals of Management 3 0 0 3
2 PC 127DS Cryptography and Network Security 300 3
3 PE4
Professional Elective – 4
300 3127EY Data Science using R
127EE Internet of Things and Applications
127FB DevOps
4 PE5
Professional Elective – 5 (Offline/Online)
300 3
127FS Natural Language Processing
127BX Big Data Analytics
127DJ Deep Learning
127EW Blockchain Technologies
5 OE2 Open Elective – 2 (Offline/Online) 300 3
6 PC 12751 Cryptography and Network 002 1Security Lab
7P C
Lab Linked to Professional Elective – 4
002 112753 Data Science using R Lab
12757 Internet of Things and  Applications Lab
12754 DevOps Lab
8 PW1 12763 Project Work (Phase – I) 0 0 6 3
TOTAL 15 0 10 20
B.Tech. 4 Year (8 semesters) Regular Programme in
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
COURSE STRUCTURE
(Applicable for the Batch admitted from the Academic Year 2022-23)
IV YEAR II SEMESTER
S.  Group Subject                         Subject L T P CreditsNo. Code
1 HS 128GW Entrepreneurship and Project 200 2Management
Professional  Elective-6 (Offline/Online)
128CR Human Computer Interaction
2 PE6 128GR Cyber Forensics 3 0 0 3
128GM Ad-hoc and Sensor Networks
128HE Quantum Computing
3 OE3 Open Elective-3 (Offline/Online) 300 3
4 PW 12870 Seminar (Presentation with Report 102 2before 1st Mid Exams)
5 PW2 12869 Project Work  (Phase – II) 0 0 20 10
TOTAL 9 0 22 202022-2023 43
List of Open Elective offered by various Departments
for B.Tech. Programme
(Applicable for the Batches admitted from the Academic year 2022-23 onwards)
S. Name of the Open Elective-1 Open Elective-2 Open Elective-3
No.  Department (B. Tech. III Year (B. Tech. IV (B.Tech. IV
Offering II Semester) Year I Semester) Year II Semester)
1 CSE/  Fundamentals of
IT/ Data Structures (126KF)
CST  Fundamentals of  Internet of  Cloud
Database Management Things(127KY) Computing(128LE)
Systems(126KG)
 Operating Systems  Cyber Security  Blockchain
(126KK) (127KT) Technologies
 Software  Engineering (128LD)
(126KQ)
2 CSE  Fundamentals  of  Machine Learning  Introduction to
(AI & ML) Artificial Intelligence Basics (127KZ) Natural Language
(126KD) Processing (128LL)
3 CSE  Fundamentals of  Data Visualization  Data Mining
(Data Data Science(126KE) using Python (128LF)
Science)  R Programming (127KU)
(126KP)
4 ECE  Biomedical Electronics  Sensors and  Wearable Devices
and Applications Actuators (127KV) and its Applications
(126KA) (128LP)
 Principles of Communi-  Elements of Satellite  Systems Engineering
cation Technologies Communications (128LG)
(126KN) (127KW)
 Verilog HDL(126KR)
5 ETM  Principles of  Telecommunication  -
Communications Switching Systems
(126KM) (127LC)
6 EEE  Engineering Materials  Renewable Energy  Waste Management
(126KC) Sources(127LA) Techniques and
Power Generation
(128LN)
7 Mech. Engg.  Operations Research  Research -
(126KL) Methodology
(127LB)
8 H&M  Introduction to Data  Industrial
Analytics(126KJ) Management
(127KX)
 Intellectural Property  Behavioral Skills  Marketing
Rights(126KH) and Professional Management
Communication (128LM)
(127KS)
9B S  Disaster Management -  Environmental Impact
(126KB) Assessment (128LH)
Note: Open Elective- Students should take Open Electives from List of Open Electives
Offered by Other Departments/Branches Only.
Ex: A Student of Computer Science and Engineering can take Open Elective Subject
from all other departments/branches except Open Electives offered by CSE Dept.44 Computer Science and Engineering
I Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 121AG 3 1 0 4
LINEAR ALGEBRA AND MULTIV ARIABLE CALCULUS
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE, IT, ETE, CST, CSE(AI&ML) &
CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To learn the concepts of rank of a matrix and applying it to understand
the consistency of the system of equations.
2. To solve a system of linear equations.
3. To study properties of Eigen values and Eigen vectors.
4. To find extreme values for functions of several variables.
5. To find the solutions of first and higher order ODE.
6. To evaluate the double and triple integrals for functions of several
variables.
UNIT 1: Linear System of Equations (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Types of real matrices and complex matrices, rank, echelon form, normal
form, consistency and solution of linear systems (Homogeneous and Non-
homogeneous), LU decomposition method.
UNIT 2: Eigen values and Eigen vectors (~8 Lecture Hours)
Eigen values, Eigen vectors and their properties. Cayley - Hamilton theorem
(only statement), Inverse and powers of a matrix using Cayley - Hamilton
theorem, Diagonalization.
UNIT 3: Functions of Several Variables (~10 Lecture Hours)
Limit & Continuity (Definitions), Partial derivatives, Chain rules, Total
derivative, Differentiation of implicit functions, Jacobian, functional
dependency. Maxima and Minima of functions of two variables (with and
without constraints) and Lagrange’s method of undetermined multipliers.
UNIT 4: Ordinary Differential Equations (~12 Lecture Hours)
First Order ODE – Exact Differential Equations, Differential Equations
reducible to exact, Orthogonal trajectories, Law of natural growth & decay.
Linear differential equations of higher order with constant coefficients:
Non-homogeneous differential equations with RHS term of the type e
ax, sinax,
cosax, polynomials in x, eaxV(x), xV(x),  Method of variation of parameters,
Applications to Electrical circuits.2022-2023 45
UNIT 5: Multiple Integrals and its Applications (~10 Lecture Hours)
Multiple Integrals - Double and Triple integrals, Change of variables, Change
of order of integration.
Applications: Finding area as double integrals and volume as triple integrals.
Text Books:
1. Dr. B. S. Grewal, Higher Engineering Mathematics, 43 rd Edition, Khanna
Publishers.
2. N. P. Bali, Engineering Mathematics, 1 st Edition, Lakshmi Publications.
Reference Books:
1. B.V .Ramana, Higher Engineering Mathematics, 1 st Edition, Tata
McGraw-Hill Publications.
2. E.Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 9 th Edition, John Wiley
and Sons Publisher.
3. Srimanta Pal, SubodhC.Bhunia, Engineering Mathematics, 1 st Edition,
Oxford Higher Education.
4. R K Jain & S R K Iyengar, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 5 th
Edition, Narosa Publishers.
Online Resources:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106051
2. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mIeeVrv447s
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Solve and analyse the solution for the system of equations.
2. Compute the Eigen values and Eigen vectors which come across under
linear transformations.
3. Determine the extreme values of functions of two variables with/
without constraints.
4. Find the solutions of ordinary differential equations.
5. Evaluate double and triple integrals.
6. Apply the knowledge of mathematics for real situations.
k  k  k46 Computer Science and Engineering
I Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 121AH 3 0 0 3
PROGRAMMING FOR PROBLEM SOLVING
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE, IT, ETE, CST, CSE(AI&ML) &
CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To learn the fundamentals of computers.
2. To understand the various steps in program development.
3. To use the syntax and semantics of C Programming Language.
4. To decompose a problem into functions and to develop modular reusable
code.
5. To implement C programs in structured programming approach to solve
problems.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Computers : Computer systems, computing environments,
computer languages, creating and running programs, program development,
algorithms and flowcharts, number systems - binary, decimal, hexadecimal
and conversions.
Introduction to C Language : Background, C programs, identifiers, types,
variables, constants, input/output, operators (arithmetic, relational, logical,
bitwise etc.), expressions, precedence and associativity, expression evaluation,
type conversions.
Statements: Selection statements (making decisions) – if and switch statements.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Repetition Statements (Loops):while, for, do-while statements, Loop
examples, other statements related to looping – break, continue.
Functions: Designing structured programs, functions, user defined functions,
inter function communication, standard functions, scope, storage classes -
auto, register, static, extern, scope rules, type qualifiers, recursion- recursive
functions, limitations of recursion.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Arrays: Concepts, using arrays in C - declaration and definition, accessing
elements in array, storing values in arrays, array applications- linear search,
binary search and bubble sort, two dimensional arrays, multi-dimensional arrays.
Pointers: Introduction (basic concepts), pointers for inter function
communication, pointers to pointers, compatibility, pointer applications -2022-2023 47
arrays and pointers, pointer arithmetic and arrays, passing an array to a
function, memory allocation functions, array of pointers, pointers to void,
strings - concepts, C strings, string input / output functions, arrays of strings,
string manipulation functions.
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Enumerated, Structure and Union Types: The type definition (typedef),
enumerated types, structures - declaration, initialization, accessing structures,
operations on structures, complex structures - nested structures, structures
containing arrays, structures containing pointers, arrays of structures, structures
and functions, passing structures through pointers, self-referential structures,
unions, bit fields.
UNIT 5: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to files, using files in C, reading data from files- fscanf(), fgets(),
fgetc(), fread(), writing data to files- fprintf(), fputs(), fputc(), fwrite(),
detecting the end-of-file, error handling during file operations, random access
to files, command line arguments, preprocessor commands.
Text Books:
1. B.A.Forouzan and R.F.Gilberg, Computer Science: A Structured
Programming Approach Using C, 3
rd Edition, Cengage learning.
2. Reema Thareja, Introduction to C Programming, 2 nd Edition, Oxford
University Press.
Reference Books:
1. Byron Gottfried, Schaum’s Outline of Programming with C, 2 nd Edition,
McGraw-Hill.
2. E.Balaguruswamy, Programming in ANSI C, 7 th Edition, Tata McGraw-
Hill.
3. B.W.Kernighan and Dennis Ritchie, C Programming Language, 2nd Edition,
PHI.
Online Resources:
1. https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Yvq27 sSPOxjJakf1c
XpWq76L0F0cu_/view
2. https://cs50.harvard.edu/college/2022/spring/48 Computer Science and Engineering
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Relate various computing environments and formulate solutions to
problems using algorithms and flowcharts.
2. Understand data types and control structures to solve problems.
3. Divide a problem into functions and synthesize a complete program.
4. Use arrays, pointers and strings to formulate programs.
5. Apply user defined data types to model real world data.
6. Develop solutions to problems using file-handling functions.
k  k  k2022-2023 49
 I Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 121AC 3003
BASIC ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
(Common to CSE, IT, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: Physics
Course Objectives :
1. Concepts of Basic Magnetic and Electrical AC&DC Circuits.
2. Understand the concepts of Electrical Machines
3. To understand the VI characteristics of various Electronic components
like Diode, BJT and SCR.
UNIT 1: Magnetic Circuits and DC Circuits (~11 Lecture Hours)
Magnetic Circuits: Flux, flux density, Magnetic field Intensity, reluctance,
MMF, Faraday’s laws of Electromagnetic induction – statically & dynamically
induced EMF-Lenz’s law - Fleming’s rules, Simple problems DC Circuits:
Electrical Circuit elements: R, L and C, voltage and current sources, KCL &
KVL, Analysis of simple DC Circuits,  Nodal and Mesh analysis of simple
circuits with DC excitation, Simple problems.
UNIT 2: Single Phase AC Circuits (~10 Lecture Hours)
Network Theorems: Superposition, Thevenin’s and Norton’s Theorems with
independent sources (DC excitation only), Simple Problems.
1- AC Circuits: Representation of sinusoidal waveforms, Average and RMS
values, phasor representation, power factor; Impedance and Power triangles,
Resonance in Series RLC Circuit.
UNIT 3: DC Machines & Batteries (~9 Lecture Hours)
DC Machines:
DC Generators: Construction, principle of operations and types, EMF
equations, simple problems.
DC Motors: Principle of operation, significance of Back EMF, Torque equation,
Characteristics & applications, losses & efficiency, Direct Load test.
Batteries: Types, ratings and Applications.
UNIT 4: AC Machines (~7 Lecture Hours)
Transformers: Construction, Principle of Operation, EMF Equation, Losses
and efficiency (Direct Load Test) Induction motors: Construction, Principle
of Operation, Production of rotating magnetic field, Speed-Torque
characteristics, Applications, simple Problems.
Synchronous Generators – Construction, Classification, Principle of Operation.
Synchronous Motors – Principle of operation and applications.50 Computer Science and Engineering
UNIT 5: Basic Electronics (~7 Lecture Hours)
Operation of PN Junction Diode, BJT & SCR and their Static Characteristics,
Half wave and Full Wave Diode bridge rectifiers.
Text Books:
1. T.K.Nagasarkar and M.S.Sukhija, Basic Electrical Engineering, Oxford
University Press, 3rd Edition, 2018.
2. D.P.Kothari and I.J.Nagrath, Basic Electrical Engineering, Tata McGraw
Hill, 3rd Edition, 2010.
3. Dell, Ronald M Rand, David A J, ‘Understanding Batteries’, Royal Society
of Chemistry, 2001.
4. D.P.Kothari and I.J.Nagrath Theory and problems of Basic Electrical
Engineering, PHI, 2016.
Reference Books:
1. P. S. Bimbhra, Power Electronics, Khanna Publications, 2018.
2. D.C.Kulshreshtha, Basic Electrical Engineering, McGraw Hill, 1st Edition,
2009.
3. Jimmie J. Cathey, Syed A. Nasar, Basic Electrical Engineering, Schaum’s
Outline.
4. Huges, Electrical and Electronic Technology, Person, 2010.
Online Resources:
1.  https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108108076
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students should be able to
1. Understand the concept and analyze the Magnetic & DC circuits.
2. Analyze the 1  Ac circuits and Network theorems with DC excitation.
3. Demonstrate and analyze the DC Electrical machines.
4. Demonstrate and analyze the Transformers.
5. Demonstrate and analyze the rotating AC Machines.
6. Understand the Basic Electronic devices.
k  k  k2022-2023 51
I Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 121AD 2 0 0 2
DESIGN THINKING
(Common to CSE, IT, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives: The main objectives of this course are
1. To inculcate attitude to solve societal problems using design thinking tools.
2. To come-up with proper design which further leads to successful products
or enterprises.
3. To instill a sense of significance towards applying creativity to product
and service design.
UNIT 1: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Design Thinking: Origin of Design thinking, Importance
of Design thinking, Understanding Design thinking: A non- linear process -
5-stage d.school process model, Application of design thinking.
UNIT 2: (~7 Lecture Hours)
Empathy: Difference between Empathy and Sympathy, Role of Empathy in
design thinking, Empathy mapping, Understanding empathy tools: Customer
Journey map, Persona; Importance of Empathizing before Ideating.
Define: Explore define phase in Design Thinking, Methods of Define phase.
UNIT 3: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Ideation: Introduction, Types of Thinking- convergent, divergent, critical and
creative thinking; Ideation Methods- Brainstorming, Storyboarding, Bingo
Selection, Six Thinking Hats, Mind mapping.
UNIT 4: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Prototyping and Testing: Prototyping and methods of prototyping. User
testing methods, Advantages and disadvantages of user Testing/ Validation.
Iteration and Pitching.
UNIT 5: (~7 Lecture Hours)
Innovation: Definition, Innovation and creativity, Innovation Triangle-
Desirability, Feasibility and Viability; Types of Innovation – Product Innovation,
Process Innovation and Business Model Innovation.
Design thinking in various sectors: Design thinking to meet corporate needs.
Case studies in Information T echnology, Finance, Education, Management,
Health care and Retail sector.52 Computer Science and Engineering
Text Books:
1. Daniel Ling, Complete Design Thinking Guide for Successful
Professionals, Create Space Independent Publishing, 2015.
2. Andrew Pressman, Design Thinking: A Guide to Creative Problem Solving
for Everyone, Routledge Taylor and Francis group, 2019.
Reference Book:
1. Idris Mootee, Design Thinking for Strategic Innovation: What They Can’t
Teach You at Business or Design school, John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
2. Tim Brown, Change by Design_ How Design Thinking Transforms
Organizations and Inspires Innovation, Harper Bollins, 2009.
3. George E Dieter, Engineering Design, 5 th Edition, The McGraw-Hill
Companies, 2013.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.interaction-design.org/
2. https://designthinking.ideo.com/
3. https://www.innovationtraining.org/design-thinking-mindsets/
4. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc20_mg38/preview
5. https://www.ideou.com/blogs/inspiration/what-is-design-thinking
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the importance of various phases of Design Thinking.
2. Empathize with the customers and formulate specific problem statement.
3. Generate an idea through ideation techniques.
4. Understand various prototyping methods and Iterate solutions.
5. Understand innovation, and application of design thinking in various sectors.
k  k  k2022-2023 53
I Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 121AE 1 0 3 2.5
ENGINEERING GRAPHICS
(Common to CSE, IT, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives: The course will enable the students
1. To impart skills of drawing instruments and their use to convey exact
and complete information of any object.
2. To construct conics and cycloidal curves used for various engineering
applications.
3. To impart knowledge about standard principles of orthographic projection
of objects
4. To develop different surfaces of simple solids.
5. To differentiate between isometric view and projection and conversion
of isometric views to orthographic viewsvice-versa.
6. To acquire computer drafting skill for communication of concepts, ideas
in the design of engineering products.
UNIT 1: (~3 Lecture Hours and 9 Practical Hours)
Introduction to Engineering Graphics: Principles of Engineering Graphics
and their significance.
Scales- Plain & diagonal.
Conic Sections - Construction of ellipse, parabola and hyperbola (general
method only).
Cycloidal curves : Cycloid, Epicycloid and Hypocycloid (general methods
only).
UNIT 2: (~3 Lecture Hours and 9 Practical Hours)
Orthographic Projections : Principles of orthographic projections-
conventions- Projections of points in all positions; projection of straight lines-
line inclined to one reference plane and with two reference planes (excluding
traces and midpoint problems).
UNIT 3: (~3 Lecture Hours and 9 Practical Hours)
Projections of Planes: Plane inclined to one reference plane and with two
reference planes.
Projections of Solids: Projections of solids (prisms, pyramids, cylinders
and cones) in simple position and axis inclined to one reference plane only.
UNIT 4: (~3 Lecture Hours and 9 Practical Hours)
Development of Surfaces: Basic concepts of development of surfaces, Methods54 Computer Science and Engineering
of development – Parallel line development and radial line development,
Development of prisms, pyramids, Cylinders and cones.
UNIT 5: (~ 4 Lecture Hours and 12 Practical Hours)
Isometric Projection: Principles of Isometric Projection – Isometric Scale
Isometric Views – Isometric views of Lines, Planes and Simple Solids only.
Orthographic Views: Conversion of Isometric Views to Orthographic Views.
Introduction to computer aided drafting (For internal evaluation weightage
only) Introduction to Computer Aided Drafting, views and commands,
orthographic projection of points, lines, planes and solids. Conversion of
orthographic projection into isometric view.
Note: Syllabus for external examination will be from 1-5 units in conventional
mode and introduction to computer aided drafting is exempted from the external
examination.
Text Books:
1. Basanth Agrawal and Agrawal C.M., Engineering Graphics, 1
st Edition,
Tata McGrawHill, 2018.
2. Bhatt N.D.,Engineering Drawing, 53 rd Edition, Charotar Publishing house
Pvt.Ltd., 2016.
Reference Books:
1. Venugopal.K, Engineering Drawing and Graphics Plus Autocad, New
Age International (P) Ltd., New Delhi, 2010.
2. Dhananjay A Jolhe, Engineering Drawing, Tata McGrawHill, 2014.
3. T. Jeyapoovan, Vikas: Engineering Drawing and graphics Using
AutoCAD, 3rd Edition, S. Chand and company Ltd.
4. K Balaveera Reddy, Computer Aided Engineering Drawing, CBS
Publishers & distributors, 2015.
Online Resources:
1. www.engineeringdrawing.org
2. Virtual labs(www.vlab.co.in)
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Acquire proficiency in instrumental drawing and will be able to visualize
the object, draw conic sections and cycloidal curves.
2. Draw and understand about orthographic projections of points, straight
lines.
3. Improve visualization skills in different types of planes and solids.
4. Draw and understand about the development of surfaces of various solids.
5. Ability to read, understand and interpret engineering drawings.
6. Apply computer aided drafting tools to create objects.2022-2023 55
I Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12104 1 0 3 2.5
ENGINEERING WORKSHOP
(Common to CSE, IT, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives: The course will enable the students
1. To gain a good basic working knowledge required for the production of
various engineering products.
2. To provide hands on experience about use of different Engineering
materials, tools, equipments and processes that are common in the
Engineering field.
3. To develop a right attitude, team working, precision and safety at work
place.
4. To study commonly used carpentry joints.
5. To have practical exposure to various welding and joining processes.
I) Trades for Exercises: (~12 Lectures + 36 Practices)
At least two exercises from each trade:
i) Carpentry
ii) Fitting
iii) Tin-Smithy and Development of jobs carried out and Soldering
iv) House-wiring
v) Foundry
vi) Black smithy
II) Trades for Demonstration and Exposure :
i) Plumbing ii) Welding
Text Books:
1. B.L. Juneja, Workshop Practice, Cengage publications.
2. K. Venugopal, Workshop Manual, Anuradha Publications.
Reference Books:
1. P. Kannaiah and K. L. Narayana, Workshop Manual, 2
nd Edition, Scitech
publications (I) Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad, 2015.
2. K. Venugopal, Dr. V . Prabhu Raja and G . Sreekanjana,Workshop Manual,
1st Edition, Anuradha Publications, 2012.
3. Hajra Choudury S.K., Hajra Choudury A.K. and Nirjhar Roy S.K.,
Elements of Workshop Technology, Media Promoters and Publishers
private limited, Mumbai, vol I 2008 and V ol II 2010.56 Computer Science and Engineering
Online Resources:
1. www.technologystudent.com
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Demonstrate and understand the Engineering workshop safety
regulations.
2. Identify and use marking tools, measuring equipment and to work to
prescribed accuracies.
3. Understand the practical difficulties encountered in industries during any
assembly work.
4. Do simple electrical work through their carrier.
5. Design different prototype in the fittings, carpentry, foundry, black smithy
and sheet metal work.
k  k  k2022-2023 57
I Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12108 0 0 3 1.5
PROGRAMMING LAB
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE, IT, ETE, CST, CSE (AI&ML) &
CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To gain familiarity with the programming environment to edit, compile,
run and debug programs.
2. To apply the syntax and semantics of C Programming Language.
3. To develop modular, reusable and readable C programs using the concepts
like arrays, functions etc.
4. To implement programs using file handling functions.
List of Experiments:
Week 1: Familiarization with programming environment
Introduction to the working environment, compiling, running and debugging
C programs, simple C programs.
Week 2: Simple computational problems using arithmetic expressions
a. Write a C program which reads time required (in hours and minutes) to
complete two tasks and then print the total time in hours and minutes.
b. Write a C program which reads five students marks in a test and then
prints average mark of passed students (assume that a minimum of 35 is
needed to pass) using operators.
c. Assume an object is thrown upwards with some initial velocity, u (in m/
sec). Write a C program to find the maximum height which it can reach.
Assume acceleration due to gravity is 9.8m
2 /sec.
Hint: Maximum height, h=u2/2g.
Week 3: Problems involving if-then-else structures and switch statement
a. Write a C program to check whether a given number is even or odd using
bitwise operator.
b. Write a C program to find the roots of a quadratic equation.
c. Write a C program to carry out the arithmetic operations addition,
subtraction, multiplication, division and modulus using switch statement.
Week 4: Iterative problems
a. Write a C program to find whether a given number is Armstrong or not.
b. Write a C program to determine if the given number is a prime number
or not.58 Computer Science and Engineering
c. Write a C program to calculate the following Series: Sum=1-x 2/2! +x4/
4!-x6/6!+x8/8!-x10/10!
d. Write a C program to find the number of even and odd digits in a given
number.
Week 5: Simple functions
a. The least common multiple (LCM) of two positive integers a and b is the
smallest integer that is evenly divisible by both a and b. Write a C program
that reads two integers and calls LCM (a, b) function that takes two integer
arguments and returns their LCM. The LCM (a, b) function should
calculate the least common multiple by calling the GCD (a, b) function
and using the following relation: LCM (a, b) = ab / GCD (a, b).
b. Write a function to find the factorial of a positive integer.
c. Write a menu-driven C program that allows a user to enter 3 numbers
and then choose between finding the smallest, largest, sum, or average.
Use a switch statement to determine what action to take. Display an error
message if an invalid choice is entered.
d. Write a C program that reads two integers and calls a factorial function
to compute 
nCr value.
Week 6: Recursive functions
a. Write a C program that reads two integers x and n and calls a recursive
function to compute x n.
b. Write a C program that uses a recursive function to solve the Towers of
Hanoi problem.
c. Write a C program that uses a recursive function to generate Pascal’s
triangle.
d. A Fibonacci sequence is defined as follows: the first and second terms in
the sequence are 0 and 1. Subsequent terms are found by adding the
preceding two terms in the sequence. Write a C program which calls a
recursive function to generate the first n terms of the sequence.
Week 7: Applications of 1D Array
a. Write a C program to generate all the prime numbers between 1 and n,
where n is a value supplied by the user using Sieve of Eratosthenes
algorithm.
b. Write a C program to implement linear search on a list of integers.
c. Write a C program to implement binary search on a list of integers.
d. Write a C program to implement Bubble sort to sort a given list of integers
in ascending order.2022-2023 59
Week 8: Applications of 2D arrays
a. Write a C program that reads two matrices and performs Addition of two
matrices using functions.
b. Write a C program that reads two matrices and performs Multiplication
of two matrices using functions.
Week 9: Applications of Strings
a. Write a C program to perform the following
i) To insert a sub-string into a main string at a given position.
ii)To delete n characters from a given position in a string.
b. Write a C program to determine whether the given string is a palindrome
or not.
c. Write a C program to replace a substring with another in a given line of
text.
d. Write a C program to sort array of strings.
Week 10: Pointers and dynamic memory allocation
a. Write a C program to find the number of times a given word (i.e., a short
string) occurs in a sentence. (i.e., a long string).
b. Using pointers, write a function that receives a character string and a
character as argument and deletes all occurrences of this character in the
string. Function should return the corrected string with no spaces.
c. Write a C program to find the maximum element from a set of elements.
The number of elements will be decided during the execution of the
program.
Week 11: Structures
a. Write a menu-based program in C that uses a set of functions to perform
the following Operations:
i) Reading a complex number
ii) Writing a complex number
iii) Addition of two complex numbers
iv) Subtraction of two complex numbers
v) Multiplication of two complex numbers Represent the complex
number using a structure
b. Declare a structure to store the following information of an employee:
Employee code, Employee name, Salary, Department number, Date of
joining (it is itself a structure consisting of day, month and year). Write a
C program to store the data of N employees where N is given by the user
(Use dynamic memory allocation). Include a Menu that allows user to
select any of the following features:60 Computer Science and Engineering
i) Use a function to display the employee information who are drawing
the maximum and minimum salary.
ii) Use a function to display the employee records in ascending order
according to their date of joining.
Week 12: File Handling
a. Write a C program to display the contents of a file to standard output
device.
b. Write a C program which copies one file to another, replacing all
lowercase characters with their uppercase equivalents.
c. Write a C program to count the number of times a character occurs in a
text file. The file name and the character are supplied as command-line
arguments.
d. Write a C program to reverse the first n characters in a file. The file name
and n are specified on the command line. Use fseek function.
Text Books:
1. B.A.Forouzan and R.F.Gilberg, Computer Science: A Structured
Programming Approach Using C, 3
rd Edition, Cengage learning.
Reference Books:
1. Byron Gottfried, Schaum’s Outline of Programming with C, 2 nd Edition,
McGraw-Hill.
2. Yashavant P. Kanetkar, Let Us C, 13 th Edition, Bpb Publications.
3. B.W.Kernighan & Dennis Ritchie, C Programming Language, 2nd Edition,
PHI.
4. E.Balaguruswamy, Programming in ANSI C, 7 th Edition, Tata McGraw-
Hill.
Online Resources:
1. https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Yvq27-qsSPOxjJakf1cXp
Wq76L0F0cu_/view
2. https://cs50.harvard.edu/college/2022/spring/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Use tools to compile, debug, run and test the program.
2. Translate algorithms into executable programs.
3. Implement programs using control structures and arrays.
4. Develop modular and reusable code using functions.
5. Demonstrate usage of pointers, strings and structures.
6. Solve problems using file concepts.2022-2023 61
I  Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12103 0 0 3 1.5
BASIC ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING LAB
(Common to CSE, IT, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To verify the Network Theorems and understand the usage of common
electrical measuring instruments.
2. To understand the basic characteristics of Transformers and Electrical
Machines.
3. To understand the VI characteristics of various Electronic components
like Diode, BJT and SCR.
PART-A (Compulsory)
1. Verification of KCL&KVL.
2. Verification of Superposition theorem with DC excitation.
3. Verification of Thevenin’s & Norton’s theorems with DC excitation.
4. Direct Load Test on Single Phase Transformer
5. OCC Test on DC Shunt Generator
6. Torque-Speed characteristics of a 3-
Induction Motor by conducting
Load Test.
7. V-I Characteristics of PN Junction Diode and Zener Diode.
8. V-I Characteristics of SCR.
PART-B (Any two experiments)
1. Study of different types of batteries.
2. Determination of Resonant frequency & Bandwidth for a series RLC
resonance circuit.
3. Output waveforms of Half wave and full wave bridge Rectifiers.
4. Static output and input characteristics of BJT.
Text Books:
1. T.K.Nagasarkar and M.S.Sukhija, Basic Electrical Engineering, Oxford
University Press, 3
rd Edition, 2018.
2. D.P.Kothari and I.J.Nagrath, Basic Electrical Engineering, Tata McGraw
Hill, 3rd Edition, 2010.
3. Dell, Ronald M Rand, David A J, ‘Understanding Batteries’, Royal
Society of Chemistry, 2001.
4. D.P.Kothari and I.J.Nagrath Theory and problems of Basic Electrical
Engineering, PHI, 2016.62 Computer Science and Engineering
Reference Books:
1. P. S. Bimbhra, Power Electronics, Khanna Publications, 2018.
2. D.C.Kulshreshtha, Basic Electrical Engineering, McGraw Hill, 1
st
Edition, 2009.
3. Jimmie J. Cathey, Syed A. Nasar, Basic Electrical Engineering, Schaum’s
Outline.
4. Huges, Electrical and Electronic Technology, Person, 2010.
Online Resources:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108108076
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students should be able to
1. Analyze and solve circuits using Kirchoff’s Laws.
2. Apply network theorems to analyze and solve DC circuits.
3. Comprehend the OCC test on Separately excited DC Generator.
4. Analyze the performance of a 3  Induction motor and Transformer.
5. Analyze and interpret VI characteristics of a Diode & SCR.
6. Identify and compare the characteristics of different types of Batteries.
k  k  k2022-2023 63
I Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12106 2 0 0 -
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(Common to CSE, IT, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites:  Knowledge on Environmental Issues, natural resources,
biodiversity, sustainable development
Course Objectives:
1. To imbibe the importance of ecological balance for sustainable
development.
2. To acquire the knowledge on the impacts of developmental activities
and mitigation measures.
3. To study the international and national environmental policies and
regulations.
UNIT 1: (~ 6 Lecture Hours)
Ecosystems: Definition, Scope, and Importance of ecosystem (ecosystem
value, services and carrying capacity), Classification, Structure and functions
of an ecosystem (Food chains, food webs, and ecological pyramids. Flow of
energy, Bio Geo Chemical Cycles), Bioaccumulation, Bio-magnification, Field
visits.
UNIT 2: (~ 6 Lecture Hours)
Natural Resources: Classification of Natural Resources and their uses:
Living and Non-Living resources, Water resources: use and over utilization
of surface and ground water, floods and droughts, Dams benefits and
problems. Mineral resources: use and exploitation, environmental effects
of extracting and using mineral resources, Land resources: Forest resources,
Energy resources: growing energy needs, renewable and non- renewable
energy sources, use of alternate energy source, case studies.
UNIT 3: (~ 6 Lecture Hours)
Biodiversity and Biotic Resources: Introduction, Definition, genetic, species
and ecosystem diversity. Value of biodiversity; (consumptive se, productive
use, social, ethical, aesthetic and optional values). India as a mega diversity
nation, Hot spots of biodiversity. Field visit. Threats to biodiversity: (habitat
loss, poaching of wildlife, man-wildlife conflicts);conservation of
biodiversity: In-Situ and Ex-situ conservation. National Biodiversity act, Field
Trip to nearby lake.64 Computer Science and Engineering
UNIT 4: (~ 7 Lecture Hours)
Environmental Pollution and Control Technologies: Environmental
Pollution: Classification of pollution, Causes, Effects and control methods
of Air Pollution, Water Pollution, Soil Pollution and Noise Pollution: Solid
Waste and its Management: and characteristics of e-Waste and its
management. Swach Bharat Mission – Save Soil Campaign.
Global Environmental Issues and Global Efforts: Climate change and
impacts on human environment. Ozone depletion and Ozone depleting
substances (ODS). International conventions / Protocols: Earth summit, Kyoto
protocol, and Montréal Protocol. NAPCC-GoI Initiatives. Environmental
control of Epidemics and Pandemics.
UNIT 5: (~ 7 Lecture Hours)
Environmental Policy, Legislation & EIA: Salient Features of
Environmental Protection act, Air Act-1981, Water Act, Forest Act, Wild life
Act National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 Municipal Solid Waste Management
and Handling rules, Biomedical Waste Management and Handling Rules,
Hazardous Waste Management and Handling Rules, e-Waste Management
and Handling Rules. EIA: Concept of EIA and Importance of EIA.
Towards Sustainable Future: Concept of Sustainable Development Goals,
Crazy Consumerism, Urban Sprawl, Human health, Concept of Green
Building, Ecological Foot Print, Life Cycle Assessment (LCA),Low Carbon
Life Style. Environmental Ethics and Economics.
Text Books:
1. Erach Bharucha, Textbook of Environmental Studies for Undergraduate
Courses, University Grants Commission.
2. R.Rajagopalan, Environmental Studies, Oxford University Press.
Reference Books:
1. Richard T. Wright., Environmental Science: towards a sustainable future,
PHL Learning Private Ltd. New Delhi, 2008.
2. Gilbert M. Masters and Wendell P. Ela., Environmental Engineering and
science PHI Learning Pvt.Ltd., 2008.
3. Daniel B. Botkin & Edward A.Keller, Environmental Science, Wiley
INDIA Edition.
4. Anubha Kaushik, Environmental Studies, 4
th Edition, Newage
international publishers.
5. Dr. M. Anji Reddy, Text book of Environmental Science and Technology,
BS Publications, 2007.
6. Y . Anjaneyulu, Introduction to Environmental Science, BS.Publication.2022-2023 65
Online Resources:
1. https://www.epa.gov/students/lesson-plans-teacher-guides-and-online-
environmental-resources-educators.
2. https://onlinecourses.swayam2.ac.in/cec20_hs10/preview
3. https://open.ed.ac.uk/environment-sustainability-resources/
4. https://onlinepublichealth.gwu.edu/resources/sources-for-climate-news/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Based on this course, the Engineering graduate will understand/evaluate/
develop technologies based on ecological principles and environmental
regulations, which in turn helps in sustainable development.
2. Acquire the knowledge on ecological principles and functions of eco
systems and their importance for survival.
3. Develop the knowledge on role of natural resources for sustenance of
life.
4. Analyze the concepts of bio - diversity and its role in the maintenance of
ecological balance.
5. Evaluate the various causes, effects, control/mitigation of environmental
pollution on man and environment.
6. Follow the environmental legislations in their daily life and professional
practice to protect the environment.
k  k  k66 Computer Science and Engineering
I Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 122AA 3 0 0 3
APPLIED CHEMISTRY
(Common to CSE, IT, CSE(AI&ML) & CSE(Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To bring adaptability to the concepts of chemistry and to acquire the
required skills to become a perfect engineer.
2. To acquire the knowledge of water treatment, electrochemistry and
corrosion which are essential for the Engineers and in industry.
3. To acquire the skills pertaining to Polymers and Energy sources to apply
them for various engineering fields etc.
4. To impart then knowledge of engineering materials and their aspects
useful for understanding material chemistry.
UNIT 1: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Water and its treatment: Introduction to hardness of water:Causes of
hardness and its units. Estimation of hardness of water by complexometric
method and related numerical problems. Potable water and its specifications:
Steps involved in the treatment of potable water, Disinfection of potable water
by chlorination and break-point chlorination. Boiler troubles: Sludges, Scales
and Caustic embrittlement. Internal treatment of boiler feed water: Calgon
conditioning, Phosphate conditioning, Colloidal conditioning. External
treatment methods: Softening of water by Ion exchange process. Desalination
of Brackish water–Reverse osmosis.
UNIT 2: (~12 Lecture Hours)
Electrochemistry and corrosion: Electrochemistry: Electrochemical cells,
Electrode potential, Standard electrode potential. Nernst equation: derivation
and significance. Electrochemical series and its applications. Construction
and functioning of Hydrogen and Calomel electrode. pH determination using
Calomel electrode. Batteries:Primary and Secondary batteries. Construction,
working of Lithium Cell and Lithium-ion battery and its applications to
electrical vehicles. Fuel cells: Construction and applications of Methanol
Oxygen fuel cell. Corrosion: Causes and effects of corrosion. Theories of
chemical and electrochemical corrosion. Mechanism of electrochemical
corrosion. Types of corrosion: Galvanic corrosion, Concentration cell
corrosion, Waterline and Pitting corrosion. Factors affecting rate of corrosion.
Corrosion control methods-Cathodic protection: Sacrificial anodic protection
and Impressed current cathodic methods. Surface coatings: Metallic coatings
– Methods of coatings: Hot dipping, galvanization, tinning.2022-2023 67
UNIT 3: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Polymeric materials: Definition of polymers, Classification of polymers
with examples.Types of polymerization: Addition Polymerization (free radical
mechanism) and condensation polymerization with examples – Nylon 6:6,
Terylene. Plastics: Definition and characteristics. Plastics: thermosetting and
thermoplastics. Preparation, properties and  engineering applications of PVC,
Bakelite, Teflon. Rubbers: Natural rubber and its vulcanization. Elastomers:
Characteristics, preparation, properties and applications of Buna-S, Butyl
and Thiokol rubber. Conducting polymers: Characteristics and Classification
with examples, mechanism of conduction in trans- polyacetylene and
applications of conducting polymers. Biodegradable polymers: Concept
and advantages of biodegradable polymers. Preparation of Polylactic acid
and poly vinyl alcohol and their applications.
UNIT 4: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Energy sources: Fuels-Introduction, Calorific value of fuel: HCV , LCV ,
Dulong’s formula. Classification of fuels: Solid fuels: coal,analysis of coal –
proximate and ultimate analysis and their significance. Liquid fuels:Petroleum
and its refining. Cracking types: Moving bed catalytic cracking. Knocking:
Octane and Cetane rating. Synthetic petrol - Fischer-Tropsch’s process.
Gaseous fuels: Composition and uses of natural gas, LPG and CNG .
Combustion: Definition, Calculation of air required for the combustion of
fuel, numerical problems related to calorific value and combustion. Solar
cells: Introduction and applications of Solar cells. Biodiesel:
Transesterification and applications. 2G-Ethanol: Synthesis and applications.
UNIT 5: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Engineering Materials: Cement: Portland cement, its composition, setting
and hardening of Portland cement. Special cement: Properties and uses of
High alumina cement, White cement, and Waterproof cement. Refractories:
Classification and Characteristics of a good refractory. Properties-
Refractoriness and RUL . Lubricants: Functions and Classification of
lubricants with examples. Characteristics of good lubricants. Mechanism of
Lubrication: Thick film, thin film, and extreme pressure. Properties: Viscosity,
Cloud and pour point, Flash and fire point.
Text Books:
1. P.C.Jain and M.Jain, Engineering Chemistry, Dhanpatrai Publishing
Company, 2010
2. Rama Devi and Rath, Engineering Chemistry, Cengage learning, 2022.
3. M. Thirumala Chary, E. Laxminarayana and K.Shashikala, A Text book
of Engineering Chemistry, Pearson Publications, 2021.68 Computer Science and Engineering
4. Y . Bharathi kumari, A Text book of Engineering Chemistry, VGS
publications.
Reference Books:
1. Shikha Agarwal, Engineering Chemistry, Cambridge University Press,
Delhi (2015).
2. Shashi Chawla, Engineering Chemistry, Dhanpatrai and Company(P)Ltd,
Delhi (2011).
Online Resources:
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/106/108106170/
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/113105028
3. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/115107116
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, student will be able to
1. Understand the concepts, to identify and analyze the hardness of water
and its softening techniques in industry and daily usage.
2. Apply the working principles of batteries and their applications in
automobile field, corrosion and its prevention.
3. Learn the concepts of various types of polymers, conducting polymers,
biodegradable polymers and their applications in industrial and medical
fields.
4. Identify different types of energy sources and their applications in various
engineering fields.
5. Analyze the usage and applications of various types of cements, lubricants
and refractories in engineering field.
6. Learn the potential applications of chemistry in practical utility to become
good engineers and entrepreneurs.
k  k  k2022-2023 69
I Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 122AB 3 0 0 3
APPLIED PHYSICS
(Common to CSE, IT, CSE(AI&ML) & CSE(Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
Through this course the student is to:
1. Understand the fundamentals of quantum mechanics and study the
behaviour of a particle quantum mechanically.
2. Analyze the semiconductors and semiconductor devices.
3. Be able to classify the types and properties of dielectric and magnetic
materials
4. Understand the construction and working principle of different types of
lasers and light propagation through optical fiber.
5. Learn the fundamentals of nano material synthesis and characterizations.
UNIT 1: Quantum Mechanics (~9 Lecture hours)
Introduction to quantum physics, de-Broglie’s hypothesis, Wave-particle
duality, Davisson and Germer experiment, Heisenberg’s Uncertainty principle,
Born’s interpretation of the wave function, Schrodinger’s time independent
wave equation, Particle in one dimensional box.
Kronig-Penny model (using Bloch theorem, qualitative analysis and
conclusions), Energy bands in solids. E-k diagram, classification of materials:
Metals, Semiconductors and Insulators. Density of states (Qualitative) and
electron occupation probability (Fermi-Dirac Distribution function analysis)
UNIT 2: Semiconductor Physics (~9 Lecture hours)
Intrinsic and Extrinsic semiconductors, Carrier concentrations of Intrinsic
and Extrinsic semiconductors, Dependence of Fermi level on carrier-
concentration and temperature, Carrier generation and recombination
(Qualitative), Hall effect and calculation of Hall Coefficient (R H).
Semiconductor Devices
Radiative and non-radiative recombination in semiconductors(Qualitative),
Direct and Indirect band gap semiconductors, Diffusion and Drift currents,
p-n junction diode, Zener diode and their V-I Characteristics, LED and Solar
cell: construction, principle of operation and characteristics.
UNIT 3: Dielectric and Magnetic materials (~9 Lecture hours)
Dielectric materials : Electric dipole, Dipole moment, Oscillating dipole,
Dielectric constant, Polarizability, Electric susceptibility, Displacement vector,
Polarization Vector, Qualitative study of electronic, ionic and orientation70 Computer Science and Engineering
polarizations, Local field (Qualitative treatment) and Clausius-Mossotti
equation; Ferro-electricity –Behaviour of BaTiO 3, Piezoelectricity, Pyro-
electricity.
Magnetic materials: Permeability, field intensity, magnetic field induction,
magnetization, magnetic susceptibility, origin of magnetic moment: Bohr
magneton, classification of dia, para and ferro magnetic materials on the
basis of magnetic moment, Domain theory (Qualitative), Hysteresis curve
based on domain theory, soft and hard magnetic materials, properties of
antiferro and ferri magnetic materials.
UNIT 4: Lasers and Fibre Optics (~9 Lecture hours)
Lasers: Characteristics of Lasers, Absorption, Spontaneous and stimulated
emission process, Pumping, Population inversion, Lasing action, Einstein’s
Coefficients and their relations. Types of Lasers: Ruby laser, Carbon dioxide
(CO
2) laser, Semiconductor diode laser, Applications of laser.
Fibre Optics: Introduction, Optical fiber as a dielectric wave guide, Total
internal reflection, Acceptance angle, Acceptance cone and Numerical
aperture, Types of Optical fibers, Losses associated with optical fibers,
Applications of optical fibers (communication system, sensors).
UNIT 5: Nanomaterials: (~8 Lecture hours)
Origin of Nanotechnology, Nano Scale, Surface to V olume Ratio, Quantum
Confinement, Bottom-up Fabrication: Sol-Gel, Precipitation, Combustion
Methods; Top-Down Fabrication: Ball milling method, Chemical Vapor
Deposition, Physical Vapor Deposition, Characterization Techniques (XRD,
SEM & TEM) and Applications.
Text Books:
1. M.N.Avadhanulu, P.G . Kshirsagar & T.V . S.Arun Murthy, “A Text book
of Engineering Physics”, S.Chand Publications, 11
th Edition 2019.
2. J.P Srivastava, “Elements of Solid state physics”, 2 nd Edition, Prentice
Hall India Publishers.
3. Donald A, Neamen, “Semiconductor Physics and Devices-Basic
Principle”, McGraw Hill, 4 th Edition, 2021.
4. Palani Swamy, “Applied Physics”, Scitech Publications.
5. Narasimha Reddy Katta, “Essentials of Nano science& Nanotechnology”,
Typical Creatives NANO DIGEST, 1st Edition, 2021.
Reference Books:
1. H.C.Verma, “Quantum Physics”, TBS Publication, 2 nd Edition, 2012.
2. Halliday, Resnick and Walker, “Fundamentals of Physics”, John Wiley
& Sons, 11th Edition, 2018.
3. Charles Kittel, “Introduction to Solid State Physics”, Wiley Eastern, 2019.2022-2023 71
4. S.L.Gupta and V .Kumar, “Elementary Solid State Physics”, Pragathi
Prakashan, 2019.
5. A.K. Bhandhopadhya, “Nano Materials”, New Age International, 1 st
Edition, 2007.
6. Aliaksandr S. Bandarenka, “Energy Materials a Short Introduction to
Functional Materials for Energy Conversion and Storage” CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group.
7. M.C.Narayan, “International encyclopedia of Nanotechnology, Science
and Physics”.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCNNlt5I3Z-Qbswfo_7KAzNA/
videos.
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, student will be able to
1. Explain the quantum mechanical aspects in physics and apply the same
in differentiating the conducting properties of solids.
2. Asses and modify the carrier concentration of different types of semi-
conductors and also be able to understand the working of semiconducting
devices.
3. Choose materials on the basis of their electric and magnetic behaviour
for different engineering applications.
4. Differentiate different types of Lasers, optical fibers and realize their
application in engineering fields. Understand the underlying principles
of Lasers and fiber optics
5. Appreciate the importance of nano materials and their applicability in
modern engineering applications.
6. The student will be able to apply the tools and principles of modern
physics to comprehend engineering applications.
k  k  k72 Computer Science and Engineering
I Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 122AF 2 0 0 2
ENGLISH FOR SKILL ENHANCEMENT
(Common to CSE, IT, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
This course will enable the students to
1. Improve the language proficiency of students in English with an emphasis
on V ocabulary, Grammar, Reading and Writing skills.
2. Develop study skills and communication skills in various professional
situations.
3. Equip students to study engineering subjects more effectively and
critically using the theoretical and practical components of the syllabus.
UNIT 1: (~7 Lecture Hours)
Chapter entitled ‘Toasted English’ by R.K.Narayan from “English:
Language, Context and Culture” published by Orient Blackswan, Hyderabad.
Vocabulary: The Concept of Word Formation -The Use of Prefixes and
Suffixes - Acquaintance with Prefixes and Suffixes from Foreign Languages
to form Derivatives - Synonyms and Antonyms
Grammar: Identifying Common Errors in Writing with Reference to Articles
and Prepositions.
Reading: Reading and Its Importance - Techniques for Effective Reading.
Writing: Sentence Structures -Use of Phrases and Clauses in Sentences-
Importance of Proper Punctuation - Techniques for Writing precisely –
Paragraph Writing – Types, Structures and Features of a Paragraph - Creating
Coherence-Organizing Principles of Paragraphs in Documents.
UNIT 2: (~7 Lecture Hours)
Chapter entitled ‘Appro JRD’ by Sudha Murthy from “English: Language,
Context and Culture” published by Orient Blackswan, Hyderabad.
Vocabulary: Words Often Misspelt - Homophones, Homonyms and
Homographs
Grammar: Identifying Common Errors in Writing with Reference to Noun-
pronoun Agreement and Subject-verb Agreement.
Reading: Sub-Skills of Reading – Skimming and Scanning – Exercises for
Practice
Writing: Nature and Style of Writing- Defining /Describing People, Objects,
Places and Events – Classifying- Providing Examples or Evidence.2022-2023 73
UNIT 3: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Chapter entitled ‘Lessons from Online Learning’ by F.HaiderAlvi, Deborah
Hurst et al from “English: Language, Context and Culture” published by
Orient Blackswan, Hyderabad.
Vocabulary: Words Often Confused - Words from Foreign Languages and
their Use in English. Grammar: Identifying Common Errors in Writing with
Reference to Misplaced Modifiers and Tenses Reading: Sub-Skills of Reading
– Intensive Reading and Extensive Reading – Exercises for Practice.
Writing: Format of a Formal Letter-Writing Formal Letters E.g.., Letter of
Complaint, Letter of Requisition, Email Etiquette, Job Application with CV/
Resume.
UNIT 4: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Chapter entitled ‘Art and Literature’ by Abdul Kalam from “English:
Language, Context and Culture”
published by Orient Blackswan, Hyderabad.
Vocabulary: Standard Abbreviations in English
Grammar: Redundancies and Clichés in Oral and Written Communication.
Reading: Survey, Question, Read, Recite and Review (SQ3R Method) -
Exercises for Practice
Writing: Writing Practices- Essay Writing-Writing Introduction and
Conclusion -Précis Writing.
UNIT 5: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Chapter entitled ‘Go, Kiss the World’ by Subroto Bagchifrom “English:
Language, Context and Culture”
published by Orient Blackswan, Hyderabad.
Vocabulary: Technical V ocabulary and their Usage
Grammar: Common Errors in English ( Covering all the other aspects of
grammar which were not covered in the previous units )
Reading: Reading Comprehension-Exercises for Practice
Writing: Technical Reports- Introduction – Characteristics of a Report –
Categories of Reports Formats- Structure of Reports (Manuscript Format) -
Types of Reports - Writing a Report.
Note: Listening and Speaking Skills which are given under Unit-6 in AICTE
Model Curriculum are covered in the syllabus of ELCS Lab Course.
Note: 1. As the syllabus of English given in AICTE Model Curriculum-2018
for B.Tech First Year is Open- ended , besides following the prescribed
textbook, it is required to prepare teaching/learning materials by the teachers
collectively in the form of handouts based on the needs of the students in
their respective colleges for effective teaching/learning in the class.74 Computer Science and Engineering
Note: 2. Based on the recommendations of NEP2020, teachers are requested
to be flexible to adopt Blended Learning in dealing with the course contents.
They are advised to teach 40 percent of each topic from the syllabus in blended
mode.
Text Books:
1. “English: Language, Context and Culture” published by Orient Black
Swan Pvt. Ltd, Hyderabad, 2023 Print.
2. Fusion: Integrated Reading & Writing by Kepler published by CENGAGE
[e-Book] “English for Skill Enhancement” by Orient Black Swan Pvt.
Ltd, Hyderabad, 2023 Print.
Reference Books:
1. Effective Academic Writing by Liss and Davis (OUP)
2. Richards, Jack C, Interchange Series. Introduction, 1,2,3. Cambridge
University Press, 2022.
3. Wood, F.T. (2007). Remedial English Grammar. Macmillan.
4. Chaudhuri, Santanu Sinha, Learn English: A Fun Book of Functional
Language, Grammar and V ocabulary. 2
nd Edition, Sage Publications India
Pvt. Ltd, 2018.
5. Technical Communication. Wiley India Pvt. Ltd., 2019.
6. Vishwamohan, Aysha, English for Technical Communication for
Engineering Students. Mc Graw-Hill Education India Pvt. Ltd., 2013.
7. Swan, Michael, Practical English Usage. Oxford University Press. Fourth
Edition, 2016.
Online Resources:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109106116 [English Language for Competitive
Exams by Prof.Aysha Iqbal, IIT Madras.]
2. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc22_hs77/preview [Developing Soft
skills and Personality by Prof.T.Ravichandran, IIT Kanpur.]
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the importance of vocabulary and sentence structures
2. Choose appropriate vocabulary and sentence structures for their oral and
written communication.
3. Demonstrate their understanding of the rules of functional grammar.
4. Develop comprehension skills from the known and unknown passages.
5. Take an active part in drafting paragraphs, letters, essays, abstracts, précis
and reports in various contexts.
6. Acquire basic proficiency in reading and writing modules of English.2022-2023 75
I Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 122AK 3 1 0 4
NUMERICAL TECHNIQUES AND TRANSFORM CALCULUS
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE, IT, ETE, CST, CSE (AI&ML) &
CSE(Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To learn an alternative method for analytical methods in mathematical
concepts.
2. To apply numerical techniques in solving ordinary differential equations.
3. To study the properties of vector valued functions and differential
operators.
4. To attain the knowledge on integrals of vector valued functions.
UNIT 1: Numerical Techniques - I (~9 Lecture Hours)
Numerical Solutions of Algebraic and Transcendental Equations:
Introduction, Bisection Method, Regula- Falsi method, Iteration method and
Newton Raphson method.
Solving linear system of equations by Gauss-Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel method.
Curve Fitting: Fitting a linear, second degree, exponential curve by method
of least squares for the discrete data.
UNIT 2: Numerical Techniques - II (~9 Lecture Hours)
Numerical integration: Newton-Cote’s Quadrature Formula, Trapezoidal
Rule, Simpson’s 1/3
rd and 3/8 th Rule. Numerical solution of Ordinary
Differential Equations: Solution of ordinary differential equations by
Taylor’s Series, Picard’s method of Successive approximations, Euler’s and
Modified Euler’s method, Fourth Order Runge-Kutta Method.
UNIT 3: Laplace Transforms (~10 Lecture Hours)
Laplace Transforms - Laplace Transform of Standard functions, First and
Second Shifting Theorems, Transforms of derivatives and integrals,
Multiplication and Division by ‘t’, Laplace Transform of Periodic Function,
Unit Step function, Dirac’s Delta function.
Inverse Laplace Transform - Method of Partial Fractions, Convolution
theorem (only statement), First and Second shifting theorem.
Applications of Laplace Transforms to Ordinary Differential Equations.
UNIT 4: Vector Differentiation (~10 Lecture Hours)
Scalar and Vector point functions, Gradient, Divergence, Curl and related
properties, Unit Normal Vector, Directional Derivatives and Angle between
the surfaces, Laplacian operator, Vector identities.76 Computer Science and Engineering
UNIT 5: Vector Integration and Integral Theorems (~10 Lecture Hours)
Vector Integration - Line Integral-Work Done-Potential function, Area,
Surface and V olume Integral.
Vector Integral Theorems: Green’s theorem, Stoke’s theorem and Gauss’s
divergence theorem (only statements) and their verification.
Text Books:
1. Dr.B.S Grewal, Higher Engineering Mathematics, 43 rd Edition, Khanna
Publishers.
2. M.K.Jain, S.R.K.Iyengar and R.K.Jain, Numerical Methods for Science
and Engineering Computation, 6 th Edition, New Age International
Publishers.
Reference Books:
1. R K Jain & S R K Iyengar, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 5 th
Edition, Narosa Publishers.
2. Murray R Spiegel and Seymour Lipschutz, Vector Analysis, 2 nd Edition,
Schaums’ Outline Series.
3. S.S.Sastry, Introductory Methods of Numerical Analysis, 5 th Edition,
PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd.
Online Resources:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106101
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111107108
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Find the root of the algebraic and transcendental equation and solution
of a linear system of equations.
2. Fit a curve for the given data.
3. Find the Numerical solutions for a given first order initial value problem
and evaluate definite integral numerically.
4. Learn Laplace Transform techniques and apply for solving ODE.
5. Understand the concepts of Gradient, Divergence and Curl of a Vector
and scalar point functions.
6. Evaluate the line, surface and volume integrals.
k  k  k2022-2023 77
I Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 122AJ 3 0 0 3
DATA STRUCTURES
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE, IT, ETE, CST, CSE (AI&ML) &
CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: Programming for Problem Solving
Course Objectives:
1. Understand the notations used to analyze the performance of algorithms.
2. Understand and analyze various searching and sorting algorithms.
3. Understand the behavior of data structures such as stacks, queues, trees,
hash tables, search trees, graphs and their representations.
4. Choose an appropriate data structure for a specified application.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Basic Concepts: Algorithm-Introduction, Performance analysis – Time
Complexity and Space Complexity, Asymptotic Notation – Big O, Omega
and Theta notations, Complexity Analysis Examples.
Introduction to Data Structures: Linear and Non-linear data structures.
Review of Pointers: Pointers, Self-referential structures
Linear List: Array and Linked Representations, Singly Linked List,
Operations – Insertion, Deletion and Searching, Circularly Linked List,
Operations – Insertion, Deletion and Searching, Doubly Linked List,
Operations– Insertion, Deletion and Searching, Applications of Linked List
– Sparse matrix.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Stack: Definition, Array and Linked implementations, Applications– Infix
to Postfix Conversion, Postfix Expression Evaluation, Recursion.
Queue: Definition, Array and Linked implementations, Circular Queues–
Insertion and Deletion Operations.
UNIT 3: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Trees: Definitions, Terminology, Applications, Properties, Binary Tree - Array
and Linked representations, Binary Tree Traversals, Threaded Binary Tree-
Definition.
Priority Queues: Definition and Applications, Max Priority Queue –
Implementation, Max Heap - Definition, Insertion and Deletion.
UNIT 4: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Searching: Linear Search, Binary Search,Hashing: Introduction, Hash Tables,
Hash Functions, Overflow Handling. Dictionaries: Linear List
Representation, Hash Table Representations, Operations - Insertion, Deletion
and Searching.78 Computer Science and Engineering
Sorting: Insertion Sort, Selection Sort, Quick Sort, Merge Sort, Heap Sort,
Comparison of Sorting Methods.
UNIT 5: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Graph: Definitions, Terminology, Applications, Properties, Graph
Representations - Adjacency Matrix, Adjacency Lists, Graph Traversal
Methods – DFS and BFS
Search Trees: Binary Search Trees, Definition, Operations- Searching,
Insertion and Deletion.
Balanced Search Trees: A VL Trees- Definition and Insertion, B-Trees-
Definition and Examples, Comparison of Search Trees.
Text Books:
1. E. Horowitz, S. Sahni and Susan Anderson Freed, Fundamentals of Data
Structures in C, 2nd Edition, Universities Press.
2. Mark Allen Weiss, Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C, 2 nd
Edition, Pearson.
Reference Books:
1. Reema Thareja, Data structures using C, 2 nd Edition, Oxford higher
education.
2. A. S. Tanenbaum, Y . Langsam and M.J. Augenstein, Data Structures using
C, PHI/Pearson Education.
3. R. F. Gilberg and B.A. Forouzan, Data Structures: A Pseudocode
Approach with C, 2nd Edition, Cengage Learning.
4. D. Malhotra, N. Malhotra, Data Structures and Program Design Using
C: A Self-Teaching Introduction, Mercury Learning and Information.
5. D. Samanta, Classic Data Structures, 2 nd Edition, PHI.
Online Resources:
1. www.geeksforgeeks.org/data-structures
2. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/data_structures_algorithms/index.htm
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Determine and analyze the complexity of given algorithms.
2. Use basic data structures such as linked list, stack and queue.
3. Implement various kinds of searching and sorting techniques.
4. Design programs using advanced data structures like hash tables, binary
trees, heaps and graphs.
5. Build and compare search trees and balanced search trees.
6. Choose appropriate data structures as applied to specified problem
definition.2022-2023 79
I Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester LTP C
Course Code: 12205 0 0 2 1
ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND COMMUNICATION SKILLS LAB
(Common to CSE, IT, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
The English Language and Communication Skills (ELCS) Lab focuses
on the production and practice of sounds of language and familiarizes the
students with the use of English in everyday situations both in formal and informal
contexts.
Course Objectives:
To facilitate computer assisted multimedia instruction enabling individualized
and independent language learning.
1.  To sensitize the students to the nuances of English speech sounds, word
accent, intonation and rhythm.
2.  To bring about a consistent accent and intelligibility in students’
pronunciation of English by providing an opportunity for practice in
speaking.
3.  To improve the fluency of students in spoken English and neutralize the
impact of dialects.
4.  To train students to use language appropriately for public speaking, group
discussions and interviews.
Syllabus: English Language and Communication Skills Lab (ELCS) shall
have two parts:
a.  Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL) Lab
b.  Interactive Communication Skills (ICS) Lab
Listening Skills: Objectives
1.  To enable students develop their listening skills so that they may appreciate
the role in the LSRW skills approach to language and improve their
pronunciation.
2.  To equip students with necessary training in listening, so that they can
comprehend the speech of people of different backgrounds and regions.
Students should be given practice in listening to the sounds of the language,
to be able to recognize them and find the distinction between different sounds,
to be able to mark stress and recognize and use the right intonation in
sentences.
•  Listening for general content
•  Listening to fill up information80 Computer Science and Engineering
•  Intensive listening
•  Listening for specific information
Speaking Skills: Objectives
1. To involve students in speaking activities in various contexts
2. To enable students express themselves fluently and appropriately in social
and professional contexts
• Oral practice
• Describing objects/situations/people
• Role play – Individual/Group activities
• Just A Minute (JAM) Sessions
The following course content is prescribed for the English Language and
Communication Skills Lab.
Exercise 1: CALL Lab:
Understand: Listening Skill- Its importance – Purpose- Process- Types- Barriers-
Effective Listening. Practice: Introduction to Phonetics – Speech Sounds – Vowels
and Consonants – Minimal Pairs- Consonant Clusters- Past Tense Marker and
Plural Marker- Testing Exercises
ICS Lab:
Understand: Spoken vs. Written language- Formal and Informal English.
Practice: Ice-Breaking Activity and JAM Session- Situational Dialogues –
Greetings – Taking Leave – Introducing Oneself and Others.
Exercise 2: CALL Lab:
Understand: Structure of Syllables – Word Stress– Weak Forms and Strong
Forms – Stress pattern in sentences – Intonation.
Practice: Basic Rules of Word Accent - Stress Shift - Weak Forms and Strong
Forms- Stress pattern in sentences  Intonation - Testing Exercises
ICS Lab:
Understand: Features of Good Conversation – Strategies for Effective
Communication.
Practice: Situational Dialogues – Role Play- Expressions in Various Situations
–Making Requests and Seeking Permissions - Telephone Etiquette.
Exercise 3: CALL Lab:
Understand: Errors in Pronunciation-Neutralising Mother Tongue Interference
(MTI).
Practice: Common Indian Variants in Pronunciation – Differences between
British and American
Pronunciation -Testing Exercises2022-2023 81
ICS Lab:
Understand: Descriptions- Narrations- Giving Directions and Guidelines –
Blog Writing
Practice: Giving Instructions – Seeking Clarifications – Asking for and Giving
Directions – Thanking and
Responding – Agreeing and Disagreeing – Seeking and Giving Advice – Making
Suggestions.
Exercise 4: CALL Lab:
Understand: Listening for General Details.
Practice: Listening Comprehension Tests - Testing Exercises
ICS Lab:
Understand: Public Speaking – Exposure to Structured Talks- Non-verbal
Communication- Presentation Skills.
Practice: Making a Short Speech – Extempore- Making a Presentation.
Exercise 5: CALL Lab:
Understand: Listening for Specific Details.
Practice: Listening Comprehension Tests -Testing Exercises
ICS Lab:
Understand: Group Discussion
Practice: Group Discussion
Minimum Requirement of infrastructural facilities for ELCS Lab:
1. Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL) Lab:
The Computer Assisted Language Learning Lab has to accommodate
40 students with 40 systems, with one Master Console, LAN facility and
English language learning software for self- study by students.
System Requirement (Hardware component):
Computer network with LAN facility (minimum 40 systems with multimedia)
with the following specifications:
i)   Computers with Suitable Configuration ii) High Fidelity Headphones
2. Interactive Communication Skills (ICS) Lab:
The Interactive Communication Skills Lab: A Spacious room with
movable chairs and audio- visual aids with a Public Address System, a T.
V. or LCD, a digital stereo –audio & video system and camcorder etc.
Source of Material (Master Copy):
Exercises in Spoken English. Part 1,2,3. CIEFL and Oxford University Press
Note: Teachers are requested to make use of the master copy and get it tailor-
made to suit the contents of the syllabus.82 Computer Science and Engineering
Suggested Software:
1. Cambridge Advanced Learners’ English Dictionary with CD.
2. Grammar Made Easy by Darling Kindersley.
3. Punctuation Made Easy by Darling Kindersley.
4. Oxford Advanced Learner’s Compass, 10th Edition.
5. English in Mind (Series 1-4), Herbert  Puchta and Jeff Stranks with
Meredith Levy, Cambridge.
6. English Pronunciation in Use (Elementary, Intermediate, Advanced)
Cambridge University Press.
7. English Vocabulary in Use (Elementary, Intermediate, Advanced) Cambridge
University Press.
8. TOEFL & GRE (KAPLAN, AARCO & BARRONS, USA, Cracking GRE
by CLIFFS).
9. Digital All Orell Digital Language Lab (Licensed Version)
Referred Lab Manual: English Language Communication Skills – Manual
cum Workbook published by CENGAGE, 2022.
Reference Books:
1.   English Language Communication Skills – Lab Manual cum Workbook,
Cengage Learning India Pvt. Ltd, 2022.
2.   Shobha KN & Rayen J. Lourdes, Communicative English – A workbook,
Cambridge University Press, 2019.
3. Kumar Sanjay & Lata Pushp, Communication Skills: A Workbook, Oxford
University Press, 2019.
4.   Board of Editors, ELCS Lab Manual: A Workbook for CALL and ICS
Lab Activities, Orient Black Swan Pvt. Ltd, 2016.
5. Mishra, Veerendra et al, English Language Skills: A Practical Approach,
Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Online Resources:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109103183 [Phonetics and Phonology: A broad
overview by Prof. Shakuntala Mahanta, IIT Guwahati]
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109104031 [Communication Skills by
Dr.T.Ravichandran, IIT Kanpur]2022-2023 83
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1.   Differentiate between the letters of the alphabet and the phonetic symbols.
2. Demonstrate the right pronunciation of the words in English using phonetic
transcription and word stress.
3.   Speak with proper intonation, voice modulation and tonal groups.
4. Maximize the listening comprehension skills through various language
modules.
5. Develop Speaking skills with clarity and confidence individually and in
groups to discuss and present the topics chosen and understand the nuances
of team dynamics.
6. Work individually and discuss in teams to present the topics and
demonstrate their public speaking skills and presentation skills through
various aids like posters, PPTs etc.,
k  k  k84 Computer Science and Engineering
I Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12201 0021
APPLIED CHEMISTRY LAB
(Common to CSE, IT, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives: The course consists of experiments related to the
principles of chemistry required for engineering student. The student will
learn:
1. Estimation of hardness of water to check its suitability for drinking
purpose.
2. Perform estimations of acids and bases using conductometry,
potentiometry and pH metry methods.
3. Prepare polymers such as Bakelite and nylon-6 in the laboratory.
4. Skills related to the lubricant properties such as saponification value,
surface tension and viscosity of oils.
List of Experiments:
i. Volumetric Analysis:
1. Estimation of hardness of water complexometric titration by using EDTA
2. Estimation of ferrous iron by Dichrometry.
3. Estimation of ferrous iron by Permanganometry.
ii. Conductometry:
Estimation of the amount of given acid by Conductometry.
iii. Potentiometry:
1. Estimation of the amount of given acid by Potentiometry.
2. Estimation of the amount of Fe
2+ by Potentiometry using Potassium
dichromate.
iv. pH Metry:
Determination of an acid concentration using pH meter.
v. Colorimetry:
Estimation of Copper using Colorimetry.
vi. Preparations:
1. Preparation of Bakelite.
2. Preparation Nylon–6
vii. Lubricants:
1. Estimation of saponification value of a given lubricant oil.
2. Estimation of Viscosity of lubricant oil using Ostwald’s Viscometer2022-2023 85
viii.Virtual lab experiments
1. Batteries for electrical vehicles.
2. Functioning of solar cell and its applications.
Text books:
1. Lab manual for Engineering chemistry by B. Ramadevi and P. Aparna,
S Chand Publications, New Delhi (2022)
2. College Practical Chemistry by V .K. Ahluwalia, Narosa Publications Ltd.
New Delhi (2007)
Reference books:
1. V ogel’s text book of practical organic chemistry 5
th edition
2. Inorganic Quantitative analysis by A.I. V ogel, ELBS Publications.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EGV9MBzqdoA
2. http://www.titrations.info/EDTA-titration-water-hardness
3. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_0MteudoAqA
4. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/content/storage2/courses/104103071/pdf/
mod16.pdf
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the concepts of error, its analysis and also to develop the
skills to tabulate the experimental data and derive valid conclusions.
2. Have hands on experience in performing the electro-analytical techniques
such as Conductometry, Potentiometry and pHmetry.
3. Gain the ability to prepare polymeric materials like Bakelite and
Nylon-6.
4. Estimate the Saponification value and viscosity of Lubricant oil.
5. Compare the experimental results with those introduced in lecture, draw
relevant conclusions and substantiate.
6. Apply theoretical knowledge to real world situations, emphasizing the
practical applications of chemical principles.
k  k  k86 Computer Science and Engineering
I Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12202 0 0 3 1.5
APPLIED PHYSICS LAB
(Common to CSE, IT, CSM & CSD)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
Through this course the student is to
1. Determine and classify magnetic materials and electro-magnetization.
2. Determine the type of semiconductor and Study the temperature
dependence of resistivity.
3. Bring out the basic characteristics of semiconductor devices.
4. Construct basic electrical circuits and understand the effect of different
components of the circuit on the electric parameters.
5. Learn the fundamentals of fiber optics and apply diffraction phenomenon.
Any of the following Ten experiments to be performed:
List of Experiments :
1. Biot – Savart’s law to verify Magnetic field along the axis of current
carrying coil – Stewart and Gees method.
2. Study B-H curve of a magnetic material.
3. To determine Energy gap of a material taken in the form of p-n junction
diode.
4. Determination of Hall co-efficient and carrier concentration of a given
semiconductor.
5. To study V-I characteristics of a solar cell.
6. V-I characteristics of a p-n junction diode and Zener diode.
7. Measurement of Time constant of an R-C circuit (Charging and
Discharging).
8. Resonance Phenomena & Q-factor of L-C-R circuit (Series/Parallel).
9. Evaluation of numerical aperture of a given optical fiber.
10. Bending and attenuation losses of fibers.
11. Dispersive power of the material of a prism – Spectrometer.
12. Wavelength of light and determining the LPI of unknown grating of a
diffraction grating using laser.
13. To find Rigidity modulus of given material using Torsional pendulum
experiment.
14. Melde’s experiment – Transverse and longitudinal modes.
15. Quantum dots.
16. Polarimeter-Polarization of light.2022-2023 87
Text books:
1. Laboratory Manual of Engineering Physics by Dr.Y .Aparna &
Dr.K.Venkateswara Rao (V .G.S Publishers)
2. Engineering Physics - 2 nd Edition NEW AGE Publications by M R
Srinivasan.
Reference books:
1. Experiments In Engineering Physics ( A Lab. Manual & W.B) -
M.N.Avadhanulu, A.A.Dani & P.M.Pokley. Publisher, S. Chand Limited.
2. Science and Technology of PHOTOVOLTAICS - 2 nd Edition- BS
Publications by P.Jayarama Reddy.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.vlab.co.in/broad-area-physical-sciences
2. http://www.bsauniv.ac.in/UploadImages/Downloads/PHYSICS-LAB-
MANUAL2017-(new-regulation).pdf
3. http://jnec.org/Lab-manuals/FE/Physics.pdf
4. https://www.myphysicslab.com/ (simple simulations)
5. https://www.iist.ac.in/departments/physics-lab
6. https://wci.llnl.gov/simulation
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Students are introduced to handling different instruments, interpret the
data and correlate the same with their understanding of its theory.
2. Study the electro-magnetization characteristics and determine hysteresis
loss
3. Determine hall coefficient and energy gap of the semiconductor (taken
as a diode)
4. Differentiate Zener and p-n junction diode and to determine fill factor of
a semiconductor solar cell
5. Determine the time constant, resonance and quality of the circuit
consisting of R, C &/ L components.
6. Determine wavelength of laser light and differentiate different types of
lasers, optical fibers losses
k  k  k88 Computer Science and Engineering
I Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12209 0 0 3 1.5
DATA STRUCTURES LAB
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE, IT, ETE, CST, CSE (AI&ML) &
CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: Programming for Problem Solving
Course Objectives:
1. Write data structure programs using arrays, structures and pointers.
2. Develop applications using linear data structures such as linked lists,
stacks and queues.
3. Learn to write programs to implement various sorting and searching
algorithms.
4. Write programs to implement various non-linear data structures like trees,
graphs and search trees.
List of Experiments:
Week 1: Write a C program to create structure with the name – student,
which contains the fields - name, rollno and gender. With the help of pointer
read and display the student details.
Week 2: Write a C program that uses functions to perform the following
operations on a singly linked list of integers:
a. Creation b. Insertion c. Deletion d. Display
Week 3: Write a C program that uses functions to perform the following
operations on a doubly linked list:
a. Creation b. Insertion c. Deletion d. Display
Week 4: Write a C program to implement stack using an array and a linked
list.
Week 5: Write a C program that uses stack operations to convert a given
infix expression into its postfix equivalent. Implement the stack using an
array.
Week 6: Write a C program to implement a queue using an array and a singly
linked list.
Week 7: Write a C program that uses functions to perform the following:
a. Search for a key element in a list of elements using linear search.
b. Search for a key element in a list of sorted elements using binary search.
c. To arrange a list of elements in ascending order using insertion sort.2022-2023 89
Week 8:
a. Write a C program that implements selection sort algorithm to arrange a
list of elements in descending order.
b. Write a C program that implements heap sort algorithm for sorting a list
of integers in ascending order.
Week 9:
a. Write a C program that implements quick sort algorithm to arrange a list
of elements in ascending order.
b. Write a C program that implements merge sort algorithm for sorting a
list of integers in ascending order.
Week 10: Write a C program to implement all the functions of a dictionary
using hashing.
Week 11: Write a C program that uses functions to perform the following:
a. Create a binary search tree of integers.
b. Traverse the above binary search tree recursively in preorder, inorder
and postorder.
c. Search for an integer key in the above binary search tree recursively.
d. Traverse the above binary search tree non-recursively in inorder.
Week 12: Write a C program to perform the following:
a. Traverse a given graph using DFS algorithm.
b. Traverse a given graph using BFS algorithm.
Text Books:
1. E. Horowitz, S. Sahni and Susan Anderson Freed, Fundamentals of Data
Structures in C, 2
nd Edition, Universities Press.
2. Mark Allen Weiss, Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C,
2nd Edition, Pearson.
Reference Books:
1. Reema Thareja, Data structures using C, 2
nd Edition, Oxford higher
education.
2. A. S. Tanenbaum, Y . Langsam and M.J. Augenstein, Data Structures using
C, PHI/Pearson Education.
3. R. F. Gilberg and B.A. Forouzan, Data Structures: A Pseudocode
Approach with C, 2nd Edition, Cengage Learning.
4. D. Malhotra, N. Malhotra, Data Structures and Program Design Using
C: A Self-Teaching Introduction, Mercury Learning and Information.
5. D. Samanta, Classic Data Structures, 2 nd Edition, PHI.90 Computer Science and Engineering
Online Resources:
1. www.geeksforgeeks.org/data-structures
2. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/data_structures_algorithms/index.htm
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Use arrays, structures and pointers for implementing various data
structures.
2. Implement various kinds of searching algorithms.
3. Implement various internal and external sorting algorithms.
4. Develop the programs for various linear data structures like stack, queue
and linked list.
5. Implement non-linear data structures like graphs and trees.
6. Choose the appropriate data structure for solving real world problems.
k  k  k2022-2023 91
I Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12207 0 0 2 -
GENDER SENSITIZATION
(Mandatory Course)
(Common to CSE, IT, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To develop students’ sensibility with regard to issues of gender in
contemporary India.
2. To provide a critical perspective on the socialization of men and women.
3. To introduce students to information about some key biological aspects
of genders.
4. To expose the students to debates on the politics and economics of work.
5. To help students reflect critically on gender violence.
6. To expose students to more egalitarian interactions between men and
women.
UNIT 1:
Understanding Gender
Gender: Why Should We Study It? (Towards a World of Equals: Unit -1)
Socialization: Making Women - Making Men (Towards a World of Equals:
Unit -2) Introduction - Preparing for Womanhood - Growing up Male - First
lessons in Caste - Different Masculinities.
UNIT 2:
Gender and Biology
Missing Women: Sex Selection and Its Consequences ( Towards a World of
Equals: Unit - 4) Declining Sex Ratio – Demographic Consequences.
Gender Spectrum: Beyond the Binary ( Towards a World of Equals: Unit -
10) Two or Many? - Struggles with Discrimination.
UNIT 3:
Gender and Labour
Housework: The Invisible Labour ( Towards a World of Equals: Unit -3)
“My Mother doesn’t Work.” - “Share the Load.”
Women’s Work: Its Politics and Economics ( Towards a World of Equals:
Unit -7) Fact and Fiction - Unrecognized and Unaccounted work - Additional
Reading: Wages and Conditions of Work.92 Computer Science and Engineering
UNIT 4:
Issues of Violence
Sexual Harassment: Say No! (Towards a World of Equals: Unit -6)
Sexual Harassment, not Eve-teasing - Coping with Everyday Harassment-
Further Reading: “Chupulu”.
Domestic Violence: Speaking Out (Towards a World of Equals: Unit -8) Is
Home a Safe Place? -When Women Unite [Film] - Rebuilding Lives -
Additional Reading: New Forums for Justice - Thinking about Sexual Violence
(Towards a World of Equals: Unit -11) - Blaming the Victim - “I Fought for
my Life….” - Additional Reading: The Caste Face of Violence.
UNIT 5:
Gender: Co - Existence
Just Relationships: Being Together as Equals (Towards a World of Equals:
Unit -12) Mary Kom and Onler - Love and Acid just do not Mix - Love
Letters. Mothers and Fathers - Additional Reading: Rosa Parks-The Brave
Heart.
Text Book:
“TowardsaWorldofEquals:ABilingualTextbookon Gender ” written by
A.Suneetha, UmaBhrugubanda, DuggiralaVasanta, Rama Melkote, Vasudha
Nagaraj, Asma Rasheed, GoguShyamala, Deepa Sreenivas and Susie Tharu
and published by Telugu Akademi, Hyderabad,Telangana State in the year
2015.
Reference Books:
1. Menon, Nivedita. Seeing like a Feminist, New Delhi: Zubaan-Penguin
Books, 2012.
2. Abdulali Sohaila. “I Fought For My Life…and Won.” Available online
at: http://www.thealternative.in/lifestyle/i-fought-for-my-lifeand-won-
sohaila-abdulal/
Online Resources:
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc22_hs51/preview [Contexualising
Genderby Prof.Rasmi Gaur, IIT Roorkee]
2. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc19_hs57/preview [Gender justice and
Workplace security by Prof. Dipa Dube, IIT Kharagpur]2022-2023 93
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Relate the understanding of gender sensitization to basic dimensions of
thebiological, socio- logical, psychological and legal aspects of gender
through discussionof materials derived from research, facts, everyday
life, literature and film.
2. Develop a finer grasp of how gender discrimination works in our society
and how tocounter it.
3. Maximize their insight into the gendered division of labour and its relation
to politicsand economics.
4. Perceive the genders Men and women as professionals equipped to work
andlive together as equals.
5. Develop a sense of appreciation of women in all occupations.
6. Identify, Understand and respond to Gender issues and to address them
legallyprotecting and safeguarding the individual’s rights.
Assessment Criteria:
SATISFACTORY PARTICIPATIONCERTIFICATE shall be issued only
after securing greater than or equivalent to 75% of the attendance in the
course along with the active Classroom interaction and participation by the
students.
k  k  k94 Computer Science and Engineering
II Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 123AU 3 0 0 3
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
(Common to CSE, IT, CST, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE(Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To learn the Random variables and theoretical Probability distributions.
2. To study the Sampling Distribution of mean and Testing of hypothesis.
3. To learn the concepts of confidence interval for proportions and small
sample tests.
4. To check and determine the relation between two variables/attributes.
UNIT 1: Random Variables (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Random variables, Discrete Random variable, Continuous
Random variable, Probability Distributions and Cumulative Distribution
functions, Properties, Mathematical Expectation.
UNIT 2: Probability Distributions (~10 Lecture Hours)
Binomial Distribution, Poisson Distribution, Normal Distribution, Exponential
Distribution Sampling Distribution of means. (  known and unknown).
UNIT 3: Estimation and Inference Theory (~10 Lecture Hours)
Estimation - Point Estimation, Interval Estimation, confidence interval for
mean.
Inference Theory (Large Samples): Null hypothesis, Alternate hypothesis,
Type I and Type II errors, Critical region, Test of significance for single mean,
Test of significance for difference of means.
UNIT 4: Testing of Hypothesis (~10 Lecture Hours)
Confidence interval for proportions, Test of significance for single and
difference of proportions.
Small sample tests:t, F and Chi-Square Distributions.
UNIT 5: Correlation and Regression (~8 Lecture Hours)
Coefficient of correlation, Rank correlation, Regression coefficient, Lines of
regression, Multiple correlation and regression.
Text Books:
1. S.C.Gupta and V .K.Kapoor, Fundamentals of Mathematical Statistics,
11
th Edition, Sultan Chand & Sons.
2. Jay L. Devore, Probability and Statistics for Engineering and Sciences,
9th Edition, Cengage Publications2022-2023 95
Reference Books:
1. S.P.Gupta, Statistical Methods, 33 rd Edition, Sultan Chand & Sons.
2. Miller and John E Freund, Probability and Statistics for Engineers, 5 th
Edition.
Online Resources:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105090/
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/111106112/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Differentiate among the random variables involved in the probability
models which are useful for all branches of Engineering.
2. Understand probability distributions such as Binomial, Poisson and
Normal distributions.
3. Analyze data and draw conclusion about collection of data under study
using theory of estimation.
4. Apply testing of hypothesis for large sample.
5. Apply testing of hypothesis for small sample.
6. Estimate and establish relation between variables using correlation and
regression analysis.
k  k  k96 Computer Science and Engineering
II Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 123AN 3 1 0 4
DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF ALGORITHMS
(Common to CSE, IT, CST, CSE(AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: Programming for Problem Solving, Data Structures
Course Objectives:
1. Analyze the asymptotic performance of algorithms.
2. Apply important algorithmic design paradigms and methods of analysis.
3. Synthesize efficient algorithms in common engineering design situations.
4. Classify and categorize the problems into P and NP.
UNIT 1: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: Characteristics of algorithm, Analysis of algorithm: Asymptotic
analysis of complexity bounds – best, average and worst-case behaviour,
Performance measurements of Algorithm- Time and space trade-offs, Analysis
of recursive algorithms through recurrence relations- Substitution method
and Masters method, Fundamental Algorithmic strategies – General Methods.
Divide and conquer- Binary search, Merge sort, Quick sort, Strassen’s Matrix
Multiplication.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Disjoint Sets: Disjoint set operations, union and find algorithms, connected
components and bi-connected components.
Greedy method - Knapsack problem, Job sequencing with deadlines,
Minimum cost spanning trees: Prim’s and Kruskal’s, Huffman Coding.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Dynamic Programming: Chained matrix multiplication, All pairs shortest
path problem, Optimal binary search trees, 0/1 knapsack problem, Reliability
design, Traveling salesperson problem.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Backtracking: The n-queens problem, Sum of Subsets problem, Graph
Coloring, Hamiltonian cycles.
Branch and Bound: 0/1 Knapsack problem - LC Branch and Bound solution,
FIFO Branch and Bound solution, Travelling salesperson problem.
UNIT 5: (~8 Lecture Hours)
NP-Hard and NP-Complete problems: Basic concepts, Non-deterministic
algorithms, NP - Hard and NP- Complete classes, Cook’s theorem.2022-2023 97
Approximation Algorithms: The vertex-cover problem, Travelling
salesperson problem, the subset-sum problem.
Text Books:
1. Ellis Horowitz, Sartaj Sahni and S. Rajasekharan, Fundamentals of
Computer Algorithms, 2nd Edition, Universities Press.
2. Thomas H Cormen, Charles E Lieserson, Ronald L Rivest and Clifford
Stein, Introduction to Algorithms, 4th Edition, MIT Press/McGraw-Hill.
Reference Books:
1. M. T. Goodrich and R.Tomassia, Algorithm Design: Foundations,
Analysis and Internet examples, John Wiley and sons.
2. Aho, Ullman and Hopcroft, Design and Analysis of Algorithms, Pearson
Education.
Online Resources:
1. https://web.stanford.edu/class/archive/cs/cs161/cs161.1138/
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106101060
3. https://onlinecourses.swayam2.ac.in/cec20_cs03/preview
4. https://www.udemy.com/course/design-and-analysis-of-algorithms/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Apply design principles and concepts to algorithms.
2. Evaluate asymptotic run-time complexity of algorithms and recurrence
relations.
3. Design algorithms for realistic problems such as divide and conquer,
greedy, non-deterministic and approximation problems.
4. Develop dynamic programming algorithms and analyze their
computational complexity.
5. Use Backtracking and Branch & Bound techniques to solve real world
problems.
6. Formulate approximation algorithms for finding optimal solutions.
k  k  k98 Computer Science and Engineering
II Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 123AM 3 1 0 4
DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
(Common to CSE, IT, CST, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: Data Structures
Course Objectives:
1. Understand the basic concepts and the applications of database systems.
2. Master the basics of SQL and construct queries using SQL.
3. Understand the relational database design principles.
4. To familiarize with the basic issues of transaction processing and
concurrency control.
5. To familiarize with database storage structure, indexing and recovery
mechanisms.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: History of Database System, Database System Applications,
Purpose of Database Systems, View of Data, Database Languages – DDL,
DML, Relational Databases, Data Storage and Querying, Transaction
Management, Database Architecture, Database Users and Administrators.
Database Design and the E-R Model : The Entity-Relationship Model,
Constraints, Removing Redundant Attributes in Entity Sets, Entity-
Relationship Diagrams, Reduction to Relational schemas, Entity-Relationship
Design Issues, Extended E-R Features.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to the Relational Model: Structure of Relational Databases,
Database Schema, Schema Diagrams, The Relational Algebra, Tuple
Relational Calculus, Domain Relational Calculus.
Introduction to SQL: Overview of the SQL Query Language, SQL Data
Definition, Basic Structure of SQL Queries, Additional Basic Operations,
Set Operations, Null Values, Aggregate Functions, Nested Subqueries.
UNIT 3: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Advanced SQL: Join Expressions, Views, Integrity Constraints and Triggers.
Normalization: Introduction to Schema Refinement, Functional dependency
theory,1NF, 2NF, 3NF, Dependency Preservation, BCNF, Multi -valued
dependencies, 4NF, Join Dependencies, 5NF.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Transaction Management : Transaction Concept, A Simple Transaction
Model, Storage Structure, Transaction Atomicity and Durability, Transaction2022-2023 99
Isolation, Serializability, Transaction Isolation and Atomicity, Transaction
Isolation Levels.
Concurrency Control : Lock-Based Protocols, Multiple Granularity,
Timestamp-Based Protocols, Validation- Based Protocols.
UNIT 5: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Recovery System: Failure Classification, Storage, Recovery andAtomicity,
Recovery Algorithm, Failure with loss of non-volatile storage, Remote Backup
systems.
Indexing: Ordered Indices, B+ Tree Index files.
Text Books:
1. A. Silberschatz, Henry. F. Korth and S. Sudarshan, Database System
Concepts, 6
th Edition, McGraw Hill Education (India) Private Limited.
2. Raghu Ramakrishnan and Johannes Gehrke, Database Management
Systems, 3rd  Edition, McGraw Hill Education (India) Private Limited.
Reference Books:
1. C.J. Date, A.Kannan and S.Swami Nadhan, An Introduction to Database
systems, 8th Edition, Pearson Education.
2. Ramez Elmasri, Shamkant B. Navathe, Fundamentals of Database
Systems, 6th Edition, Pearson Education.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/dbms/index.htm
2. https://beginnersbook.com/2015/04/dbms-tutorial
3. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/105/106105175
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand concepts and the applications of database systems and
implement in real time applications.
2. Construct an Entity-Relationship (E-R) model from specifications and
transform to relational model.
3. Demonstrate the basic concepts of relational database management system
and construct unary/binary/set/ aggregate queries in Relational Algebra
and in SQL.
4. Apply normalization on database.
5. Understand the principles of database transaction management.
6. Understand the storage and recovery of database.
k  k  k100 Computer Science and Engineering
II Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 123AP 3 0 0 3
DIGITAL LOGIC DESIGN
(Common to CSE, IT, CST, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Understand basic number systems, codes and logical gates.
2. Know the concepts of Boolean algebra and minimization logic.
3. Learn the design of combinational and sequential circuits.
4. Know the basics of various types of memories.
5. Study the hardware implementation using Programmable Logic Devices.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Fundamentals of Digital Design: Digital Systems, Binary Numbers, Number
Base Conversions, Octal, Hexadecimal and other Base numbers,
Complements, Signed Binary Numbers, Binary Codes, Error Detection 
and
Correction, Binary Logic, Boolean Algebra: Basic theorems and properties of
Boolean Algebra, Boolean functions, Digital Logic Gates.
UNIT 2: (~7 Lecture Hours)
Minimization of Logic Functions: Standard representation for logic
functions, K-Map representation, Simplifications of logic functions using
K-Map, Sum of products, Product of sums simplification, Don’t care
conditions, NAND and NOR implementations.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Combinational Digital Circuits: Combinational Circuits(CC), Design
Procedure, Combinational circuit for different code converters and Parity
generator/Checker, Binary Adder-Subtractor, Decimal Adder, Binary
Multiplier, Magnitude Comparator, Decoders, Encoders, Multiplexers, De-
multiplexers, ALU: Micro-operations, Arithmetic Logic Shift Unit.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Sequential Circuits and Systems: Synchronous Sequential Circuits, Latches,
Flip-flops, Analysis of clocked sequential circuits, Registers, Shift registers,
Ripple counters, Synchronous counters, other counters and Applications of
counters.
Asynchronous Sequential Circuits -Introduction, Analysis procedure.2022-2023 101
UNIT 5: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Semiconductor Memories and Programmable Logic Devices: Memory:
Introduction, Read-Write Memory (RAM), Read Only Memory (ROM),
Memory decoding, Programmable Logic Array, Programmable Array Logic,
Sequential programmable devices: SPLD, CPLD, FPGA. Digital Integrated
Circuits.
Text Books:
1. M. Morris Mano and M.D.Ciletti, Digital Design, 6 th Edition, Pearson.
2. R.P. Jain, Modern Digital Electronics, Tata McGraw Hill Education, 2010.
Reference Books:
1. A. Kumar, Fundamentals of Digital Circuits, Prentice Hall India, 2016.
2. M.Morris Mano, Computer System Architecture, 3 rd Edition, Pearson.
Online Resources:
1. www.tutorialspoint.com/digital_circuits/index.htm
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105132
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Interpret different Number systems, Binary codes and Boolean algebra.
2. Solve Boolean expressions using minimization methods.
3. Using the concepts of combinational circuits, design simple applications.
4. Design Hardware that suits various Micro-Operations.
5. Distinguish different types of Sequential circuits.
6. Describe functionality of memory devices.
k  k  k102 Computer Science and Engineering
II Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 123A V 2 0 0 2
PYTHON  PROGRAMMING
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE, IT, ETE, CST, CSE (AI&ML) &
CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Learn syntax and semantics and create functions in Python.
2. Facilitate learning to use lists, tuples, strings and dictionaries in Python
programs.
3. Impart knowledge on files and exception handling in Python.
4. Introduce GUI programming and data handling.
UNIT 1: (~5 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Python Programming: Using Python, The IDLE
Programming Environment, Input, Processing and Output, Displaying Output
with the Print Function, Comments, Variables, Reading Input from the
Keyboard, Performing Calculations, More about Data Output: New line, Item
Separator, Escape Characters, Formatting parameters.
Decision Structures and Boolean Logic: if, if-else, if-elif-else Statements,
Nested Decision Structures, Comparing Strings, Logical Operators, Boolean
Variables.
UNIT 2: (~5 Lecture Hours)
Repetition Structures: Introduction, while loop, for loop, Sentinels, Input
Validation Loops, Nested Loops. Functions: Introduction, Defining and
Calling a Function, designing a Program to use Functions, Local Variables,
Passing Arguments to Functions, Global Variables and Global Constants,
Value-Returning Functions: Generating Random Numbers, Writing Our Own
Value-Returning Functions, Recursion.
UNIT 3: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Lists and Tuples: Sequences, Introduction to Lists, List slicing, Finding Items
in Lists with the in Operator, List Methods and Useful Built-in Functions,
Copying Lists, Processing Lists, Two-Dimensional Lists, Tuples.
Strings: Basic String Operations, String Slicing, Testing, Searching, and
Manipulating Strings.
Dictionaries and Sets: Dictionaries, Sets, Serializing Objects.2022-2023 103
UNIT 4: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Files and Exception: Introduction to File Input and Output, Using Loops to
Process Files, Processing Records, Exceptions.
Modules: Namespaces, Importing Modules, Importing Module attributes,
Module built-in functions, Packages, other features of Module.
Regular Expressions: Introduction, Special Symbols and Characters, REs
and Python.
UNIT 5: (~ 6 Lecture Hours)
GUI Programming: Graphical User Interfaces, Using the tkinter Module,
Display text with Label Widgets, Organizing Widgets with Frames, Button
Widgets and Info Dialog Boxes, Getting Input with Entry Widget, Using
Labels as Output Fields, Radio Buttons, Check Buttons.
Introduction to Plotting in Python – Basic Plots- Line and Scatter Plot,
box plot, bar plots, Histograms and plotting data contained in files.
Text Books:
1. Tony Gaddis, Starting Out with Python, 3
rd Edition, Pearson, 2015.
2. Wesley J. Chun, Core Python Programming, 2 nd Edition, Pearson.
Reference Books:
1. Reema Thareja, Python Programming, Oxford Press, 2017.
2. Allen Downe, Think Python: How to Think like Computer Scientist, 2 nd
Edition, O’Reilly publications.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.python.org/
2. https://www.w3schools.com/python/
3. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/python/index.htm
4. https://www.digimat.in/nptel/courses/video/106106182/L01.html
5. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/simple-plot-in-python-using-matplotlib/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the fundamental concepts of Python Programming.
2. Apply the concepts of control structures and usage of functions in Python
Programming.
3. Design Python programs using data structures like List, Tuple, Strings
and Dictionaries.
4. Develop proficiency in handling files, exceptions and modules.
5. Construct regular expressions and design GUI based applications using
Python.
6. Interpret various data visualization techniques.104 Computer Science and Engineering
II Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12313 0 0 3 1.5
DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS LAB
(Common to CSE, IT, CST, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Understand the different issues involved in the design and implementation
of a database system.
2. Learn and practice data modeling using the entity-relationship and
developing database designs.
3. Understand and use data manipulation language to query, update, and
manage a database.
4. Understand the significance of integrity constraints, triggers, views,
procedures and cursors.
List of Experiments:
Week 1: Practicing Data Definition Language commands.
Week 2: Practicing Data Manipulation Language commands.
Week 3: Implementation of Integrity Constraints (Table Level and Column
Level).
Week 4: Practicing Data Retrieval Language commands.
Week 5: Practicing queries using Aggregate Operations, groupby and having,
Set Operations.
Week 6: Practicing Sub Queries and Correlated Nested Queries using in,
any, all, exists etc.
Week 7: Practicing queries using join expressions, creating and querying on
views.
Week 8: Basic PL/SQL Programs. (PL/SQL Environment)
Week 9: Implementation of Triggers and Functions.
Week 10: Implementation of Procedures and Cursors.
Week 11-12: A Case Study on any one real time database application
Objective: To enable the students to practice the concepts learnt in the course
“DBMS” by developing a database using Oracle SQL. The student is expected
to practice designing, developing and querying a database by using both SQL
and PL/SQL concepts.2022-2023 105
a) E-R Modeling of the case study chosen.
b) Normalization of tables.
c) Creation of relations as per the case study.
d) Inserting data into the tables.
e) Practice the Queries by using SQL Concepts.
f) Design and develop the following on the case study.
i. Triggers ii. Cursors
Text Books:
1. S. Shah and V .Shah, Oracle for Professionals:1 (X-Team), 1
st Edition,
Shroff Publishers & Distributers Private Limited.
2. Joan Casteel, Oracle 10 g: SQL, 1 st Edition, Thomson Course Technology.
Reference Books:
1. A.Silberschatz, Henry. F. Korth and S. Sudarshan, Database System
Concepts, 6th Edition, McGraw Hill Education (India) Private Limited.
2. Raghu Ramakrishnan, Johannes Gehrke, Database Management Systems,
3rd Edition, McGraw Hill Education (India) Private Limited.
Online Resources:
1. https://dev.mysql.com/doc/
2. https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/
3. https://www.w3schools.in/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Analyze the requirements of database application.
2. Design ER model for the given problem.
3. Convert ER diagram to relational database schema.
4. Apply normalization techniques for development of application software
to realistic problems.
5. Formulate queries using SQL DML/DDL/DCL commands.
6. Demonstrate Triggers, Cursors and Stored Procedures on Database.
k  k  k106 Computer Science and Engineering
II Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12317 0 0 2 1
PYTHON PROGRAMMING LAB
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE, IT, ETE, CST, CSE (AI&ML) &
CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: Programming for Problem Solving
Course Objectives:
1. Describe the core syntax and semantics of Python programming language.
2. Learn the fundamental sequence types like lists, dictionaries, tuples, sets.
3. Handle files and modules in python.
4. Learn how to write string, Exception Handling programs in python.
List of Experiments:
Week 1:
a. Write a program to demonstrate different number data types in Python.
b. Write a program to illustrate various types of operations in Python.
Week 2:
a. Write a Python program to find largest of three numbers.
b. Write a Python program to convert temperatures to and from Celsius,
Fahrenheit. [Formula: c/5 = f-32/9]
c. Write a Python program that prints prime numbers less than 20(using
for-else).
d. Write a Python program to construct the following pattern, using a nested
for loop. 1
2 2
3 3 3
4 4 4 4
5 5 5 5 5
4 4 4 4
3 3 3
2 2
1
e. Write a program to get the binary form of a given number.
Week 3:
a. Write a program to demonstrate various list methods in Python.
b. Write a program to get a list of even numbers from a given list of numbers.
(use only list comprehensions).2022-2023 107
Week 4:
a. Write a program to add an item in a tuple without converting into a list.
b. Write a program to count the elements in a list until an element is a tuple.
c. Write a Python program to demonstrate set operations.
Week 5:
a. Write a program to access a sub string from a given string (Use slicing)
l Get the first 5 characters of a string.
l Get a substring of length 4 from the 3 rd character of the string.
l Get the last 5 characters of a string.
l Get a substring which contains all characters except the last 4 characters
and the 1st character.
l Get every other character from a string.
b. Get a string from a given string where all occurrences of its first char
have been changed to ‘$’, except the first char itself
Eg: restart output: resta$t
c. Write a program to sort a dictionary by a value.
d. Write a program to display the count of individual vowels in the input
string-using dictionary. (Ex: Input String: “welcome” Output:
{‘a’:0,’e’:2,’i’:0,’o’:1,’u’:0})
Week 6:
a. Write a Python program to find N largest element from given list of
integers using functions.
b. Write a Python program to find sum of elements of nested list using
recursion. (Input: [9, 1, [3,4], [5,2]], Output:24)
c. Write a Python program to define a module to find Fibonacci Numbers
and import the module to another program.
d. Define a module that consist of factorial and sum of individual digits of
a number as functions.
e. Write a program to find ncr by importing only factorial function from
the above module.
Week 7:
a. Write a program to handle exceptions using try..except..finally…else
b. Write a program to sort words in a file and put them in another file. The
output file should have only lower- case words, so any upper-case words
from source must be lowered. (Handle exceptions)
c. Write a program that inputs a text file. The program should print all of
the unique words in the file in alphabetical order.108 Computer Science and Engineering
Week 8: Write a Python application to create basic calculator to demonstrate
following GUI components.
i) Button ii) Text box iii) Text area
Week 9: Write a Python application to create basic Registration form to
demonstrate following GUI components.
i) Text box ii) Button iii) Submit button iv) Combo box
v) Check button vi) Text widget vii) Radio button viii)Scrolled Text
Week 10: Write a Python program to draw following plots
i) Bar graph. ii) Scatter plot. iii) Box plot.
Text Books
1. Wesley J. Chun, Core Python Programming, 2 nd Edition, Pearson.
2. Gowrishankar S, Veena A, Introduction to Python Programming,
1st Edition, CRC Press/Taylor Francis, 2018. ISBN-13: 978-0815394372.
Reference Books:
1. Y Daniel Liang, Introduction to Programming Using Python, 1 st Edition,
Pearson India, 2017.
Online Resources:
1. www.w3schools.org.in
2. https://www.sgul.ac.uk/about/ourprofessionalservices/information
services/library/documents/training- manuals/ExcelFundamentals-
Manual.pdf
3. www.lynda.com
4. www.coursera.org
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand and Apply basic concepts of Python.
2. Interpret the fundamental Python syntax and semantics and be fluent in
the use of Python control flow statements.
3. Determine the methods to create Python programs by utilizing lists,
dictionaries, tuples, sets and strings.
4. Develop the proficiency in handling of files and modules.
5. Implement the concept of Exception handling using Python.
6. Utilize Python libraries for data visualization.
k  k  k2022-2023 109
II Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12316 0 0 3 1.5
IT WORKSHOP LAB
(Common to CSE, IT, CST, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Introduction to a personal computer and its basic peripherals, the process
of disassembling and assembling a personal computer.
2. Bring in the usage of productivity tools using open office tools and LaTeX.
3. To introduce HTML for developing web pages.
4. To introduce PHP language for Server Side Scripting.
List of Experiments:
l Note: Week - 2 to Week - 7 Experiments to be done using MS Office /
Open Office.
Week 1:
a. Identification of the peripherals of a computer, components in a CPU
and its functions.
b. Draw the block diagram of the CPU along with the configuration of each
peripheral.
c. Disassembling and assembling the PC back to working condition.
d. Installation of Operating System.
Week 2:
a. Creating a Resume : Features to be covered: Formatting Styles, Inserting
table, Bullets and Numbering, Changing Text Direction, Cell alignment,
Footnote, Hyperlink, Symbols, Spell Check, Track Changes.
b. Creating a newsletter : Features to be covered: Table of Content,
Newspaper columns, Inserting Images from files and clipart, Drawing
toolbar and Word Art, Formatting Images, Textboxes, Paragraphs in word.
Week 3:
a. Create Letters using Mail Merge: Features to be covered: Date and
Time option, Greeting Line, Inserting Table and database.
b. Creating a Scheduler : Features to be covered: Gridlines, Format Cells,
Summation, auto fill, Formatting Text, Freezing Rows and Columns,
Selecting Ranges.110 Computer Science and Engineering
Week 4:
Calculation of Grade Point Average : Features to be covered: Cell
Referencing, Formulae in spreadsheet - Average, Standard Deviation, Charts,
Renaming and Inserting worksheets, Hyper linking, Count function, Sorting,
Conditional Formatting
Data Processing: Features to be covered, Importing data from different files
and database.
Week 5: Data Analyzing and Visualizing : Features to be covered: Pivot
Tables, Slicers, Pivot Charts.
Week 6: Creating Databases: Features to be covered: Creating database
using templates, Object types – Tables, Queries etc.
Week 7: Features to be covered: Creating Reports using Report wizard.
Week 8:
a. Creating a Report in LaTeX : Features to be covered: Newspaper
columns, Inserting Images from files, Formatting Images, Inserting tables,
Graphs and References.
b. Creating Slides in LaTeX : Features to be covered: Inserting Text,
Formatting Text, Text color, Bullets and Numbering.
Week 9: Develop a webpage using HTML consisting of Text, Images, Tables,
Lists, Hyperlinks.
Week 10: Develop Web page using HTML Frames and Style Sheets.
Week 11: Installation of XAMPP.
Week 12: Develop a Web Application in PHP to read data from web form
controls like text boxes, radio buttons, lists etc.
Text Books:
1. Jennifer Sargunar, Introduction to Information Technology, ITL Education
Solutions Limited, 7th Edition, Pearson Education.
2. Frank Mittelbach and Michel Goossens, LaTeX Companion, 2 nd Edition,
PHI/Pearson.
3. Steven Holzner, PHP: The Complete Reference, 5 th Edition, Tata
McGraw-Hill Education, 2007.2022-2023 111
Reference Books:
1. Vikas Gupta, Comdex Information Technology Course Tool Kit, WILEY
Dreamtech, 2005.
2. David Anfinson and Ken Quamme, IT Essentials PC Hardware and
Software Companion Guide 3 rd Edition, CISCO Press, Pearson
Education.
3. Chris Bates, Web Programming. Building Internet Applications,
3rd Edition, Wiley, 2006.
Online Resources:
1. www.w3schools.org.in
2. https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/LaTeX
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Recognizing basic peripherals of computer and perform Computer
Disassembling / Assembling.
2. Understanding the installation of OS and server side scripting with PHP
language.
3. Apply the office tools for preparing documents, Data Analyzing and
Visualizing.
4. Creating the database, importing & exporting databases and generating
reports.
5. Preparing documents and slides using LaTeX.
6. Develop static Web Pages using HTML.
k  k  k112 Computer Science and Engineering
II Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12312 2 0 0 -
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Mandatory Course)
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE, IT, ETE, CST, CSE (AI&ML)&
CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Understand the premises informing the twin themes of liberty and freedom
from a civil rights perspective.
2. Address the growth of Indian opinion regarding modern Indian
intellectuals’ constitutional role and entitlement to civil and economic
rights as well as the emergence of nationhood in the early years of Indian
nationalism.
3. To realise the significance of constitution of India from all walks of life
and tounderstand the basic concepts of Indian constitution.
UNIT 1: (~8 Lecture Hours)
History of Making of The Indian Constitution & Philosophy of The Indian
Constitution History of Making Of The Indian Constitution : History,
Drafting Committee (Composition & Working) Philosophy of the Indian
Constitution: Preamble, Salient Features.
UNIT 2: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Contours of Constitutional Rights and Duties
Fundamental Rights, Right to Equality, Right to Freedom, Right against
Exploitation, Right to Freedom of Religion, Cultural and Educational Rights,
Right to Constitutional Remedies, Directive Principles of State Policy,
Fundamental Duties.
UNIT 3: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Organs of Governance:
Parliament, Composition, Qualifications and Disqualifications, Powers and
Functions- Executive, President, Governor, Council of Ministers, Judiciary,
Appointment and Transfer of Judges, Qualifications, Powers and Functions.
UNIT 4: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Local Administration
District’s Administration head: Role and Importance, Municipalities:
Introduction, Mayor and role of Elected Representative CEO of Municipal
Corporation, Panchayati Raj: Introduction, PRI: ZilaPanchayat, Elected2022-2023 113
officials and their roles, CEO ZilaPanchayat: Position and role, Block Level:
Organizational Hierarchy (Different departments), Village level: Role of
Elected and Appointed officials, Importance of grass root democracy.
UNIT 5: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Election Commission
Election Commission: Role and Functioning, Chief Election Commissioner
and Election Commissioners, State Election Commission: Role and
Functioning, Institute and Bodies for the welfare of SC/ST/OBC and women.
Reference Books:
1. The Constitution of India, Government Publication, 1950 (Bare Act).
2. Dr.S.N. Busi, Dr. B. R. Ambedkar framing of Indian Constitution, 1
st
Edition, 2015.
3. M.P. Jain, Indian Constitution Law, 7 th Edition, Lexis Nexis, 2014.
Online Resources:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/129106003 [Constitutional Studies by Prof.
Sudhir Krishna Swami, IIT Madras]
2. https://onlinecourses.swayam2.ac.in/cec20_hs38/preview [Indian
Government and Politics by Dr.Aijaz Ashraf Wani, University of
Kashmir,Srinagar]
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Tell about function of Indian constitution with clarity and understanding.
2. Identify the Rights of equality, the Right of freedom and the Right to
constitutional remedies
3. Mark the knowledge of union government & their powers and function.
4. Define the state and central policies, fundamental duties.
5. Explain the powers and functions of Municipalities, Panchayats and Co-
operative Societies.
6. Discuss the Electoral Process, special provisions.
Assessment Criteria:
SATISFACTORY PARTICIPATIONCERTIFICATE shall be issued only
after securing greater than or equivalent to 75% of the attendance in the
course along with the active Classroom interaction and participation by the
students.
k  k  k114 Computer Science and Engineering
II Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 124BG 3 0 0 3
DISCRETE MATHEMATICS
(Common to CSE, IT, CST, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Introduce the concepts of mathematical logic.
2. Gain knowledge in sets, relations and functions.
3. Solve problems using counting techniques and combinatorics.
4. Introduce generating functions and recurrence relations.
5. Use Graph Theory for solving real world problems.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Mathematical Logic: Propositional Calculus: Statements and Notations,
Connectives, Well Formed Formulas, Truth Tables, Tautologies, Equivalence
of Formulas, Duality Law, Tautological Implications, Normal Forms, Theory
of Inference for the Statement Calculus, Consistency of Premises, Indirect
Method of Proof, Predicate Calculus: Predicates, Predicative Logic, Statement
Functions, Variables and Quantifiers, Free and Bound Variables, Inference
theory of the Predicate Calculus.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Set Theory: Basic concepts of Set Theory, Operations on Sets, Relations
and Ordering: Properties, Relation Matrix and the Graph of a Relation,
Partition and Covering, Equivalence, Compatibility, Composition of Binary
relations, Transitive Closure, Partial Ordering, Hasse Diagrams, Functions:
Bijective, Composition, Inverse, Recursive Functions, Lattice and its
Properties.
Algebraic Structures: Algebraic Systems, General Properties, Semi Groups
and Monoids, Group, Subgroup, Homomorphism, Isomorphism, Abelian
Group.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Elementary Combinatorics: Basics of Counting, Combinations and
Permutations, Enumeration of Combinations and Permutations, Enumerating
Combinations and Permutations with Repetitions, Enumerating Permutations
with Constrained Repetitions, Binomial Coefficients, The Binomial and
Multinomial Theorems, The Principle of Inclusion-Exclusion, Pigeon hole
principle and its application.2022-2023 115
UNIT 4: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Recurrence Relations: Generating Functions of Sequences, Calculating
Coefficients of Generating Functions, Recurrence relations, Solving
Recurrence Relations by Substitution and Generating functions, The Method
of Characteristic roots, Solutions of non-homogeneous Recurrence Relations.
UNIT 5: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Graph Theory: Basic Concepts, Isomorphism and Sub graphs, Graph
Representations: Adjacency and Incidence Matrices, Bipartite and Planar
Graphs, Euler’s formula, Multigraphs and Euler’s circuit, Hamiltonian Graphs.
Trees: Basic Concepts, properties, Directed trees, Binary trees, Spanning
Trees - BFS and DFS Spanning trees, Minimal spanning trees-Prim’s and
Kruskal’s Algorithms, Graph Coloring, Chromatic Number, the Four Color
problem.
Text Books:
1. J.P. Tremblay and R. Manohar, Discrete Mathematical Structures with
Applications to Computer Science, Tata McGraw Hill, 2002.
2. Joe L.Mott, Abraham Kandel and Theodore P. Baker, Discrete
Mathematics for Computer Scientists & Mathematicians, 2
nd Edition,
Pearson Education.
Reference Books:
1. Kenneth H. Rosen, Discrete Mathematics and its Applications with
Combinatorics and Graph Theory, 7 th Edition, McGraw Hill Education
(India) Private Limited.
2. Thomas Koshy, Discrete Mathematics with Applications, Elsevier
Academic Press, 2012.
Online Resources:
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc22_cs33/preview
2. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc22_cs04/preview
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Apply mathematical logic to solve problems.
2. Understand the concepts and perform the operations related to sets,
relations and functions.
3. Acquire the conceptual background needed and identify structures of
algebraic nature.
4. Apply basic counting techniques to solve combinatorial problems.
5. Formulate problems and solve recurrence relations.
6. Apply Graph Theory in solving computer science problems.116 Computer Science and Engineering
II Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 124BK 3 0 0 3
OBJECT ORIENTED PROGRAMMING THROUGH JA V A
(Common to CSE, IT, CST, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: Programming for Problem Solving
Course Objectives:
1. Learn the concepts of object-oriented programming.
2. Introduce the implementation of inheritance, packages and interfaces.
3. Understand the concepts of exception handling and multithreading.
4. Introduce the java collection framework and I/O classes.
5. Gain knowledge of swing controls and connecting to database using
JDBC.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
OOP Concepts: Data Abstraction, Encapsulation, Inheritance, Polymorphism,
Classes and Objects, Procedural and Object Oriented Programming
Paradigms.
JA V A Basics: History of Java, Java Buzzwords, Data Types, Variables, Arrays,
Operators, Expressions, Control Statements, Introducing Classes, Methods,
Constructors, Inner Classes, Anonymous Inner Classes, String Handling,
Random, Scanner.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Inheritance: Inheritance Concepts, Member Access, Creating Multilevel
Hierarchy, using super, using final with Inheritance, Forms of Inheritance,
Benefits of Inheritance, Costs of Inheritance, Polymorphism - Adhoc
Polymorphism, Pure Polymorphism, Method Overriding, Abstract Classes,
Object Class.
Packages: Defining a Package, Classpath, Access Protection, Importing
Packages.
Interfaces: Defining an Interface, Implementing Interfaces, Nested Interfaces,
Variables in Interfaces and Extending Interfaces.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Exception handling: Fundamentals of Exception Handling, Exception Types,
using try and catch, Multiple catch clauses, nested try statements, throw,
throws and finally, Built-In Exceptions, Creating Own Exception Subclasses.
Multithreading: Differences between Thread-Based Multitasking and
Process-Based Multitasking, Java Thread Model, Creating Threads, Thread
Priorities, Synchronizing Threads, Inter Thread Communication.2022-2023 117
JDBC: Introduction to JDBC drivers, Types of Drivers, java.sql package,
Connecting to a Database using JDBC, Manipulating data in Database.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Event Handling: The Delegation Event Model - Events, Event Sources, Event
Listeners, Event Classes, Handling Mouse and Keyboard Events, Adapter
Classes, Regular Expressions - Regular Expression Processing.
GUI Programming with Swing: Introduction, Limitations of AWT, MVC
Architecture, Swing Components, Swing Containers, Swing Controls - JLabel,
JTextField, JButton, JToggleButton, JCheckBox, JRadioButton,
JTabbedPane, JScrollPane, JList, JComboBox, Swing Menus, Dialogs. Layout
Managers-FlowLayout, BorderLayout, GridLayout, CardLayout,
GridBagLayout.
UNIT 5: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Stream based I/O (java.io): The Stream Classes - Byte Streams and Character
Streams, Reading Console Input and Writing Console Output, File class,
Reading and Writing files, Random Access File operations, Generics,
Enumerations, Lamda Expressions- Lamda Expression Fundamentals,
Functional Interfaces, Lamda Expression examples.
The Collections Framework (java.util): Collections Overview, Collection
Interfaces, The Collection Classes - ArrayList, LinkedList, Iterator, The For-
Each alternative, HashTable, Stack, StringTokenizer, Calendar.
Text Books:
1. Herbert Schildt, Java: The Complete Reference, 10
th Edition, McGraw
Hill Education (India) Pvt. Ltd.
2. Herbert Schildt and Dale Skrien, Java Fundamentals - A Comprehensive
Introduction, McGraw Hill Education (India) Pvt. Ltd., 2013.
3. Jim Keogh, J2EE: The Complete Reference, McGraw Hill Education
(India) Pvt. Ltd., 2017.
Reference Books:
1. Jaime Nino and Frederick. A. Hosch, An Introduction to Programming
and Object Oriented Design using Java, John Wiley & sons, 2013.
2. Timothy Budd, Understanding Object-Oriented Programming with Java,
updated Edition, Pearson Education.
3. Y . Daniel Liang, Introduction to Java Programming, Comprehensive
Version, 7th Edition, Pearson Education.
4. H.M. Dietel and Dietel, Java – How to Program, 6 th Edition, Pearson
Education/PHI.
5. Cay Horstmann, Big Java, 4 nd Edition, John Wiley and Sons Publisher,
2009.118 Computer Science and Engineering
Online Resources:
1. https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/TOC.html
2. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc22_cs47/preview
3. www.javatpoint.com/java-tutorial
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the Object Oriented Programming concepts and solve real
world problems.
2. Understand the concepts of Exception Handling and Event Handling.
3. Recognize the importance of multithread with Synchronization.
4. Demonstrate the use of Inheritance and Packages.
5. Solve problems using Java Collection Framework and I/O classes.
6. Design GUI using Swing Controls and connecting to Database.
k  k  k2022-2023 119
II Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 124BL 3 0 0 3
OPERATING SYSTEMS
(Common to CSE, IT, CST, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: Data Structures
Course Objectives:
1. Interpret the role of an Operating System in the overall computer system
and study the operations performed by it as a resource manager.
2. Understand the scheduling policies and different memory management
techniques for different Operating Systems.
3. Examine process concurrency, synchronization and deadlock situation.
4. Assess the concepts of I/O, storage and file management and introduce
system call interface for file and process management.
5. Outline the goals and principles of protection.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: Overview-Introduction-Operating System objectives and
functions, User view, System view, Operating System definition, Evolution
of Operating System- Simple Batch systems, Multiprogrammed, Time-
Sharing Systems, OS Operations, Process Management, Memory
Management, Storage Management, Protection and Security, Computing
Environments.
Operating System services, User and OS Interface, System Calls, Types of
System Calls, System Programs, Operating System Design and
Implementation, OS Structure.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Process: Process concepts-The Process, Process State, Process State
transitions, Process Control Block, Context Switch.
Threads: Definition, Various states, Benefits of threads, Types of threads,
Concept of multithreads.
Process Scheduling: Scheduling Queues, Schedulers, Scheduling Criteria,
Scheduling algorithms, Multiprocessor Scheduling. Case Studies: Linux,
Windows.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Process Synchronization: Inter-process Communication - Background, The
Critical Section Problem, Race Conditions, Mutual Exclusion, Peterson’s
solution, Synchronization Hardware, Semaphores, Classic Problems of
Synchronization - Bounded Buffer Problem, The Producer/ Consumer120 Computer Science and Engineering
Problem, Reader’s & Writer’s Problem, Dinning Philosopher Problem, Event
counters, Monitors, Message passing.
Deadlocks: Deadlocks - System Model, Deadlock Characterization -
Necessary and sufficient conditions for Deadlock, Methods for Handling
Deadlocks - Deadlock Prevention, Deadlock Avoidance, Deadlock Detection
and Recovery from Deadlock.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Memory Management: Basic Hardware, Address Binding, Logical and
physical address space, Dynamic loading, linking and shared libraries,
Swapping, Contiguous Memory Allocation - Fixed and variable partition -
Internal and External fragmentation and Compaction, Segmentation, Paging
- Hardware support for paging, Protection, shared pages, Structure of Page
Table, Case Studies - Linux, Windows.
Virtual Memory Management: Background, Demand Paging - locality of
reference, Page fault, Copy-on- Write, Page replacement, Page Replacement
Algorithms, Allocation of Frames, Thrashing.
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
File Management: Concept of File - Attributes, operations, file types, internal
structure, access methods, Directory structure, file protection, file system
structure, Allocation methods (contiguous, linked, indexed), Free-space
management (bit vector, linked list, grouping), directory implementation
(linear list, hash table), efficiency and performance.
Disk Management: Disk structure, Disk scheduling - FCFS, SSTF, SCAN,
C-SCAN, Disk formatting - Boot- block, Bad blocks.
Protection: System Protection, Goals of Protection, Principles of Protection.
Text Books:
1. Abraham Silberschatz, Peter B.Galvin and Greg Gagne, Operating System
Concepts, 9
th Edition, Wiley Asia Student Edition.
2. William Stallings, Operating Systems: Internals and Design Principles,
5th Edition, Prentice Hall of India.
Reference Books:
1. Charles Crowley, Operating System: A Design-oriented Approach,
1st Edition, Irwin Publishing.
2. Gary J. Nutt and Addison, Operating Systems: A Modern Perspective,
2nd Edition, Wesley.
3. Maurice Bach, Design of the UNIX Operating Systems, 8 th Edition,
Prentice Hall of India.
4. Daniel P. Bovet and Marco Cesati, Understanding the Linux Kernel,
3rd Edition, O’Reilly and Associates.2022-2023 121
Online Resources:
1. https://www.docdroid.net/vp5Cfdg/abraham-silberschatz-operating-
system-concepts-9th201212-pdf
2. https://www.cs.uic.edu/~jbell/CourseNotes/OperatingSystems/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand fundamentals of Operating System.
2. Demonstrate the concepts of process, thread and scheduling algorithms.
3. Apply process synchronization methods to solve critical section problem.
4. Solve deadlock problems using various deadlock management techniques.
5. Compare the different memory management techniques.
6. Summarize file & disk management, protection & security concepts and
evaluate the performance of disk scheduling algorithms.
k  k  k122 Computer Science and Engineering
II Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 124BB 3 0 0 3
COMPUTER ORGANIZATION AND ARCHITECTURE
(Common to CSE, IT, CST, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: Digital Logic Design
Course Objectives:
1. Know the basic components of Computers.
2. Understand the Architecture of 8086 Processor.
3. Learn the instruction sets, instruction formats and various addressing
modes of 8086.
4. Understand the Memory and I/O organization.
5. Understand the Parallelism both in terms of Single and Multiple
Processors.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Functional Blocks of a Computer: Introduction, Block diagram of Digital
Computer, Instruction Codes, Computer Registers, Common Bus System,
Computer Instructions, Instruction Cycle and Instruction Set. Register Transfer
Language.
Data Representation: Fixed and Floating-Point Arithmetic-Addition,
Subtraction, Multiplication and Division. Control unit Design: Hardwired
Control Unit, Control Memory, Address Sequencing, Micro-Programmed
Control Unit Design, Hardwired vs Micro- Programmed Design.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
The 8086 Microprocessor: Architecture,Register Organization, Addressing
Modes, 8086 Instruction Set and Assembler Directives, 8086 Signal
Description, Physical Memory Organization, Assembly Language example
programs, Stack Structure of 8086, Interrupt Structure of 8086, Interrupt
Vector Table, Procedures and Macros.
UNIT 3: (~7 Lecture Hours)
Peripheral Devices and their characteristics: Introduction, Input- Output
Interface, Modes of Transfer- Programmed I/O, Priority Interrupt, Direct
Memory Access, Input – Output Processor (IOP), Intel 8089 IOP, Standard I/
O interfaces – PCI, USB, SCSI.
UNIT 4: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Memory Organization: Memory Hierarchy, Main Memory, Auxiliary
Memory, Associative Memory, Cache Memory - Mapping Functions,
Replacement Algorithms, Write Policies.2022-2023 123
UNIT 5: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Parallel Processing: Introduction, Arithmetic Pipeline, Instruction Pipeline,
RISC Pipeline, Hazards, Vector Processing, Array Processors.
Multiprocessors: Characteristics of Multiprocessors, Interconnection
Structures, Inter Processor Arbitration, Inter Processor Communication and
Synchronization, Cache Coherence.
Text Books:
1. M. Morris Mano, Computer System Architecture, 3 rd Edition, Pearson.
2. K. M. Bhurchandi and A.K Ray, Advanced Microprocessors and
Peripherals, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw- Hill Education.
3. Douglas V . Hall, Microprocessor and Interfacing, 2 nd Edition, Tata
McGraw-Hill Education.
Reference Books:
1. David A. Patterson and John L. Hennessy, Computer Organization and
Design: The Hardware/Software Interface, 5 th Edition, Elsevier.
2. Carl Hamacher, Computer Organization and Embedded Systems, 6 th
Edition, McGraw Hill Higher Education.
3. William Stallings, Computer Organization and Architecture: Designing
for Performance, 10th Edition, Pearson Education.
Online Resources:
1. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/106103068/pdf/coa.pdf
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Recognize the basic components and the design of CPU, ALU and Control
Unit.
2. Know the Architecture of 8086. Realize the Instruction Set, Addressing
Modes and Assembler Directives of 8086 and Write ALP for problem
solving.
3. Understand the I/O organization and its connection to CPU.
4. Understand the Memory Hierarchy and their importance.
5. Comprehend the advantage of Instruction Level Parallelism, Pipelining.
6. Understand characteristics of Multi-Processor architecture for high
performance Processor design.
k  k  k124 Computer Science and Engineering
II Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 124BP  3 0 0 3
SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
(Common to CSE, IT & CST)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Understand the software life cycle models.
2. Understand the importance of the software development process.
3. Understand the importance of modeling and modeling languages.
4. Design and develop correct and robust software product.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Software Engineering: The evolving role of software,
changing nature of software, software myths.
A Generic view of process: Software engineering- a layered technology, A
process framework, The capability maturity model integration (CMMI),
Process patterns, Process assessment, Personal and team process models.
Process models: The Waterfall model, Incremental process models,
Evolutionary process models, The unified process.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Software Requirements: Functional and non-functional requirements, User
requirements, System requirements, Interface specification, The software
requirements document.
Requirements engineering process: Feasibility studies, Requirements
elicitation and analysis, Requirements validation, Requirements management.
System models: Context models, Behavioural models, Data models, Object
models, Structured methods.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Design Engineering: Design process and design quality, Design concepts,
The design model.
Creating an architectural design: Software architecture, Data design,
Architectural styles and patterns, Architectural design, Conceptual model of
UML, Basic structural modeling, Class diagrams, Sequence diagrams,
Collaboration diagrams, Use case diagrams, Component diagrams.
Performing user interface design: Golden rules, User interface analysis
and design, Interface analysis, Interface design steps, Design evaluation.
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Testing Strategies: A strategic approach to software testing, Test strategies
for conventional software, Black- box and white-box testing, Validation
testing, System testing, The art of debugging.2022-2023 125
Product metrics: Software quality, Metrics for analysis model, Metrics for
design model, Metrics for source code, Metrics for testing, Metrics for
maintenance.
UNIT 5: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Metrics for Process and Products: Software measurement, Metrics for
software quality.
Risk management: Reactive Vs proactive risk strategies, Software risks,
Risk identification, Risk Projection, Risk refinement, RMMM, RMMM plan.
Quality Management: Quality concepts, Software quality assurance,
Software reviews, Formal technical reviews, Statistical software quality
assurance, Software reliability, The ISO 9000 quality standards.
Text Books:
1. Roger S. Pressman, Software Engineering- A Practitioner’s Approach,
6th Edition, McGraw Hill Companies, Inc.
2. Sommerville, Software Engineering, 7 th Edition, Pearson Education.
Reference Books:
1. Grady Booch, James Rambaugh and Ivar Jacobson, The Unified
Modeling Language User Guide, 2 nd Edition, Pearson Education.
2. Waman S Jawadekar, Software Engineering Principles and Practice, The
McGraw-Hill Companies, 2004.
Online Resources:
1. https://alison.com/courses/software-engineering.
2. https://study.com/articles/
List_of_Free_Online_Software_Engineering_Courses.html
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand basic software engineering methods along with practices,
process framework and process models.
2. Analyze software requirements, SRS documents and Project
Management.
3. Develop different system models that describe the functionality of the
system.
4. Design and maintain efficient, reliable and cost effective software
solutions and suitable software metrics.
5. Understand various software testing approaches and techniques used
for software assessment.
6. Interpret the significance of Software measurement, software risks and
quality control.
k  k  k126 Computer Science and Engineering
II Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12425 0 0 3 1.5
OBJECT ORIENTED PROGRAMMING THROUGH JA V A LAB
(Common to CSE, IT, CST, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: Programming for Problem Solving
Course Objectives:
1. Develop skills to apply object oriented programming in problem solving.
2. Demonstrate the use of inheritance and interfaces.
3. Implement the concepts of exception handling and multithreading.
4. Solve problems using java collection framework and I/O classes.
5. Gain knowledge of swing controls and connecting to database using
JDBC.
Note: Use Linux/Windows for Lab Experiments. Though not mandatory,
encourage the use of the Eclipse platform.
List of Experiments:
Week 1:
Write a Java program that prints all real solutions to the quadratic equation
ax
2+bx+c=0. Read in a, b, c and use the quadratic formula. If the discriminant
b2-4ac is negative, display a message stating that there are no real solutions.
Week 2:
a. Write a Java program that checks whether the given string is a palindrome
or not.
b. Write a Java program to multiply given 3X3 matrices.
Week 3:
a. Write a Java program that accepts a number from the end-user and then
prints all prime numbers up to a given number.
b. Write a Java program to create a Box class with properties like length,
breadth, width, and volume. Display the volume of 2 different boxes by
using objects.
Week 4:
a. Write a Java program that demonstrates constructor overloading.
b. Write a Java program to implement the use of inner classes.
Week 5:
a. Write a Java program that demonstrates the following:
i. Method overloading
ii. Method overriding.2022-2023 127
b. Write a Java program to create an abstract class named ‘Shape’ that
contains two integers and an empty method named printArea ( ). Provide
three classes named Rectangle, Triangle and Circle such that each one of
the classes extends the class Shape. Each one of the classes contains
only the method printArea( ) that prints the area of the given shape.
c. Write a Java program that implements multiple inheritance.
Week 6:
a. Write a Java program that implements a multi-threaded application that
has three threads. First thread generates random integer every 1 second
and if the value is even, second thread computes the square of the number
and prints. If the value is odd, the third thread will print the value of cube
of the number.
b. Write a Java program that implements producer – consumer problem
using the concept of Inter thread communication.
Week 7:
Write a Java program that handles all mouse events and shows the event
name at the center of the window when a mouse event is fired. (Use Adapter
classes).
Week 8:
Write a Java program that creates a user interface to perform integer divisions.
The user enters two numbers in the text fields, Num1 and Num2. The division
of Num1 and Num2 is displayed in the Result field when the Divide button is
clicked. If Num1 or Num2 are not integers, the program would throw a
Number Format Exception. If Num2 is Zero, the program would throw an
Arithmetic Exception. Display the exception in a message dialog box.
Week 9:
Write a Java program that works as a simple calculator. Use a GridLayout to
arrange buttons for the digits and for the +, -, *, % operations. Add a text
field to display the result. Handle any possible exceptions like divide by
zero.
Week 10:
Write a Java program to connect to database and display Employee details
(eid,ename,dept and salary).
Week 11:
a. Write a Java program to list all the files in a directory including the files
present in all its subdirectories.
b. Write a Java program for the following:
i) Create a doubly linked list of elements.128 Computer Science and Engineering
ii) Delete a given element from the above list.
iii) Display the contents of the list after deletion.
Week 12:
Write a Java program that loads names and phone numbers from a text file
where the data is organized as one line per record and each field in a record
is separated by a tab (\t). It takes a name or phone number as input and prints
the corresponding other value from the hash table (hint: use hash tables).
Text Books:
1. Herbert Schildt, Java: The Complete Reference, 10 th Edition, McGraw
Hill Education (India) Pvt. Ltd.
2. Jim Keogh, J2EE: The Complete Reference, McGraw Hill Education
(India) Pvt. Ltd., 2017.
Reference Books:
1. Timothy Budd, Understanding Object-Oriented Programming with Java,
updated Edition, Pearson Education.
2. Y . Daniel Liang, Introduction to Java Programming, Comprehensive
Version, 7th Edition, Pearson Education.
3. H.M. Dietel and Dietel, Java – How to Program, 6 th Edition, Pearson
Education/PHI.
Online Resources:
1. https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/TOC.html
2. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc22_cs47/preview
3. www.javatpoint.com/java-tutorial
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Implement the object oriented programming concepts and solve real-
world problems.
2. Develop programs using inheritance, interface and packages.
3. Demonstrate the concepts of exception handling and Event Handling.
4. Implement real-time applications using Multithread with Synchronization.
5. Solve problems using java collection framework and I/O classes.
6. Design GUI using Swing controls and connecting to Database.
k  k  k2022-2023 129
II Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12426 0 0 3 1.5
OPERATING SYSTEMS AND MICROPROCESSOR LAB
(Common to CSE, CSE (AI&ML) & CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: Programming for Problem Solving, Object Oriented
Programming, Data Structures, Digital Logic Design
Course Objectives:
1. Make use of Linux environment and interpret the scheduling algorithms.
2. Develop solutions for deadlock and synchronization problems.
3. Assess and implement page replacement algorithms and memory
management techniques.
4. Analyze and Implement Combinational circuits using Logic gates.
5. Develop programs in Assembly language to solve the problems.
6. Understand the storage allocation of data and programs in memory and
Registers.
List of Experiments:
Week 1:
a. Programs using system calls
i. Write a C program to simulate ls | sort command.
ii. Write a C program to implement the Process System Calls. Create a new
process, create a child process to it and then make it wait and abort.
b. Implement the following experiments using Logic gates and IC’s
i. Design a Full Adder.
ii. Design 4x1 and 8x1 MUX.
Week 2:
a. Write a C program to copy the contents of one file to another using System
Calls.
b. Implement the following experiments using Logic gates and IC’s
i. Design a 3 to 8 Decoder.
ii. Design a 4-bit Comparator.
Week 3:
a. Write a C programto simulate FCFS CPU scheduling algorithm.
b. Write an Assembly Language Program (ALP) to perform 8-bit and
16-bit of the following operations: Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication
and Division.130 Computer Science and Engineering
Week 4:
a. Write a C programto simulate SJF CPU scheduling algorithm.
b. Write an Assembly Language Program (ALP) to evaluate the expression
z=x*y+w-v+u/k. Considering k, u, v, w, x and y as 8-bit and 16-bit binary
numbers.
Week 5:
a. Write a C program to simulate Priority CPU scheduling algorithm.
b. Write an ALP of 8086 to take N numbers as input and arrange them in
the following order:
i. Ascending order
ii. Descending order
Week 6 & 7:
a. Write a C programto simulate Round Robin CPU scheduling algorithm.
b. Write an ALP of 8086 to take N numbers as input and find Maximum
and Minimum numbers.
Week 8:
a. Write a C program to solve the Producer-Consumer problem using
semaphores.
b. Write an ALP of 8086 to take N numbers as input and find the Average.
Week 9 & 10:
a. Write a C program to simulate Bankers Algorithm for Dead Lock
Avoidance.
b. Write an ALP of 8086 to take a String as input and find the length.
Week 11:
a. Write a C program to simulate the Paging technique of memory
management.
b. Write an ALP of 8086 to take a string as input and find whether given
string is Substring or not.
Week 12:
a. Write a C program to simulate the Segmentation technique of memory
management.
b. Write an ALP of 8086 to take a String as input and find whether it is
Palindrome or not.
Week 13:
a. Write a C program to simulate FIFO Page replacement algorithm.
b. Write an ALP of 8086 to take a number as input and find the Factorial
using Procedure call.2022-2023 131
Week 14:
a. Write a C program to simulate LRU Page replacement algorithm.
b. Write an ALP of 8086 to find the Fibonacci series up to n terms using
Procedure call.
Text Books:
1. Abraham Silberschatz, Peter Galvin and Greg Gagne, Operating System
Concepts, 9
th Edition, Wiley Asia Student Edition.
2. William Stallings, Operating Systems: Internals and Design Principals,
5th Edition, Prentice Hall of India.
3. M. Morris Mano, Computer System Architecture, 3 rd Edition, Pearson.
4. K. M. Bhurchandi and A.K Ray, Advanced Microprocessors and
Peripherals, 3rd Edition, Tata Mc Graw- Hill Education.
Reference Books:
1. P. C. P. Bhatt, An Introduction to Operating Systems, 2 nd Edition, PHI.
2. Terrence Chan, Unix System Programming Using C++, PHI/Pearson.
3. Andrew S Tanenbaum, Modern Operating Systems, 3 rd Edition, PHI.
4. Anand Kumar, Switching Theory and Logic Design, 2013, PHI.
5. Douglas V . Hall, Microprocessor and Interfacing, 2 nd Edition, Tata
McGraw-Hill Education.
Online Resources:
1. http://codex.cs.yale.edu/avi/os-book/OS9/
2. www.cs.uic.edu/~jbell/CourseNotes/OperatingSystems
3. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/106103068/pdf/coa.pdf
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Demonstrate different system calls for writing application programs.
2. Analyse and implement operating system services such as scheduling,
page replacement and memory management.
3. Design solution for handling synchronization problem and deadlocks.
4. Analyze and Implement Combinational circuits using Logic gates.
5. Create programs in Assembly language to solve problems.
6. Understand the importance of Processor registers, Memory allocations
and recognize the representation of data and Addressing modes.
k  k  k132 Computer Science and Engineering
II Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12422 2 0 0 -
HUMAN V ALUES AND PROFESSIONAL ETHICS
(Mandatory Course)
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE, IT, ETE, CST, CSE (AI&ML) &
CSE (Data Science))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To instill among the Engineering professionals, the need to follow ethical
principles in life.
2. To stimulate thinking and help internalize the value systems and ethical
behavior.
3. To enable the students to understand the need for value based education.
4. To inculcate a sense of moral responsibility and professional ethics as
Engineers.
5. To understand the impact of ethical perspectives globally.
UNIT 1: (~7 Lecture Hours)
Understanding Value Education:
Basic Concepts: Moral and Morality, Ethics, Values, Principles – Thoughts
of Ethics: Indian Thought versus Global Thought – Objectives of Value
Education – Importance of Value Education – Personal Ethics – Professional
Ethics.
UNIT 2: (~7 Lecture Hours)
Understanding the Harmony at Various Levels:
Harmony in the Self – Harmony in the Family – Harmony in the Society –
Harmony in the Nature – Harmony in Existence – Understanding the
Interconnectedness and Mutual fulfilment – Understanding Existence as Co-
existence – CASE STUDIES.
UNIT 3: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Ethical Theories:
Utilitarian Ethics – Kant’s deontological Theory – Virtue Ethics – Kohlberg’s
Levels of Moral Development – Gilligen’s Theory - CASE STUDIES.
UNIT 4: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Professional Ethics:
Profession and Professionalism – Ethics in Engineering – Role of Engineers
– Responsibilities of Engineers – Engineering Code of Ethics – Ethical
Dilemmas– CASE STUDIES.2022-2023 133
UNIT 5: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Global Issues and Ethical Perspectives:
Business Ethics – Environment Ethics – Computer Ethics – Media Ethics –
Research Ethics – Intellectual Property Rights – Social Responsibility – CASE
STUDIES.
Text Books:
1. A foundation course in Human Values and Professional Ethics by RR
Gaur, R.Sangal and G.P.Bargaria, Excel Books, 2011.
2. Human Values and Professional Ethics by Tanu Shukla, Anupam Yadav,
Gajendra Singh Chauhan, Cengage Publications, 2018.
Reference Books:
1. Fundamentals of Ethics for Scientists and Engineers by Edmund G ,
SeeBauer, Robert L, Barry Oxford University Press, 2015.
2. Professional Ethics by R.Subramanian, Oxford University Press, 2013.
Online Resources:
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc22_mg54/preview [Ethics in
Engineering Practice by Prof.Susmita Mukhopadhyay, IITKharagpur]
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109104068 [Exploring Human Values
byProf.A.K.Sharma, IIT Kanpur]
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the importance of imbibing and inhering Ethics and values
as an individual and professional.
2. Relate the need for establishing harmony at various levels.
3. Evaluate the relevance of ethical values in their academic and professional
environment.
4. Develop right understanding about oneself and the rest of reality through
self-exploration.
5. Identify the basis for universal human values based on right understanding
providing the vision for the holistic way of living.
6. Value oneself as professionals with professional ethics and right code
ofconduct and behaviour in the working environment.
Assessment Criteria:
SATISFACTORY PARTICIPATIONCERTIFICATE shall be issued only
after securing greater than or equivalent to 75% of the attendance in the
course along with the active Classroom interaction and participation by the
students.134 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 125CN 3 1 0 4
FULL STACK DEVELOPMENT
(Common to CSE, CSE (Data Science), CSE (AI & ML), CST & IT)
Prerequisites: Object Oriented Programming through JA V A
Course Objectives:
1. To gain knowledge on basic building blocks of Full Stack Development.
2. To understand technologies to design Front-End of the application.
3. To introduce Back-End technologies of the application along with
database connection.
4. To develop the applications using frameworks.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Building Blocks of Full Stack Development: Introduction, Front-End
Technologies, Back-End Technologies, MVC, Web Services, Communication
between Front-End and Back-End, JSON - Syntax, Parsing and Serialization.
HTML 5.0: Components of HTML, Text Formatting tags, Quotations, Links,
Images, CSS: syntax, Box Model, CSS outline, Links in CSS, Responsiveness,
Position Property, Navigation Bars, Dropdown, Forms.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
JavaScript: Introduction, variables, functions, Event handling, DOM, Form
validation, JQuery - Syntax, Selectors, Events.
React: Introduction, Components - React Classes, Composing Components,
passing data using Properties & Children, Dynamic Composition, React State
- Initial State, Async State Initialization, Updating State, Event Handling,
Stateless Components, Designing Components.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
More about React: React Router - Simple Routing, Route Parameters, Query
Parameters, Links, Nested Routes, React Forms - Controlled Components,
Filters, Typed Input, Edit Form, Number Input, Date Input, Text Input, Update
API, Delete API.
Servlet: Lifecycle of a Servlet, deploying a servlet, The Servlet API, Reading
Servlet parameters, Reading Initialization parameters, Handling Http Request
& Responses, Using Cookies and Sessions, Connecting to database.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
JSP: The Anatomy of a JSP Page, JSP Processing, Declarations, Directives,
Expressions, implicit objects, Java Bean, Connecting to database.2022-2023 135
Spring Framework: Introduction, Architecture, MVC, Interception, Chain
of Resolvers, View Resolution, Multiple View Pages, Multiple Controllers,
Model Interface, RequestParam, Form Tag Library, Form Text Field, CRUD
example, File Upload, Validations.
UNIT 5: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Hibernate: Introduction, Architecture, Installation and Configuration, Java
Objects, Inheritance Mapping, Collection Mapping, Mapping with Map,
Hibernate Query Language, Caching, Spring Integration.
Web Services: Introduction, types of web services, Building RESTful Web
Services with JAX-RS.
Text Books:
1. Mayur Ramgir, FullStack Development with Spring MVC, Hibernate,
jquery and BootStrap, WILEY Publications, 2020.
2. Uttam K. Roy, Web Technologies, OXFORD University press, 2010.
3. Vasan Subramanian, Pro MERN Stack, APress, second Edition, 2019.
References:
1. Matt Frisbie, Professional JavaScript for Web Developers, WILEY
Publications, 2020.
2. Terry Ann Felke-Morris, Basics of Web Design, Pearson, Fifth Edition.
3. Alex Banks and Eve Porcello, Learning React, O’Reilly, 2017.
Online Resources:
1. https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/6/tutorial/doc/bnayk.html
2. https://www.w3schools.com/html/default.asp
3. https://www.w3schools.com/css/default.asp
4. https://www.w3schools.com/REACT/DEFAULT.ASP
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Demonstrate knowledge on the building blocks of Full Stack
Development and its Front-End designing using HTML, CSS.
2. Understand the concepts of JavaScript and JQuery.
3. Design interactive UI with React JS.
4. Implement Back-End using Java technologies like Servlets and JSP.
5. Develop the applications with Spring framework and hibernate.
6. Build a web service with JAX-RS.
k  k  k136 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 125CD  3 0 0 3
COMPUTER NETWORKS
(Common to CSE, CSE (Data Science), CSE (AI & ML),CST & IT)
Prerequisites: Computer Organization and Architecture
Course Objectives:
1. Introduce the fundamental types of computer networks.
2. Demonstrate the TCP/IP and OSI models with merits and demerits.
3. Develop an understanding of modern network architecture from a design
and performance perspective.
4. Introduce UDP and TCP Models along with application layer protocols.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: Uses of Computer Networks and Applications, Network
hardware, Network software, Reference models.
Physical Layer: Guided Transmission Media: Twisted Pairs, Coaxial Cable,
Fiber Optics, Wireless Transmission, Digital Modulation and Multiplexing:
FDM, TDM, CDM.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Data Link Layer: Design issues, Framing, Error detection and Correction,
Elementary Data Link Protocols, Sliding Window Protocols.
Medium Access sub layer: The Channel Allocation Problem, Multiple Access
Protocols: ALOHA, Carrier Sense Multiple Access Protocols, Collision Free
Protocols, Ethernet, Data Link Layer Switching, WLANs – IEEE 802.11
Architecture.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Network Layer: Design issues, Routing algorithms: The Optimality Principle,
Shortest Path Algorithm, Flooding, Distance Vector Routing, Link State
Routing, Hierarchical Routing, Broad Cast Routing, Multicast Routing.
Congestion Control Algorithms: Approaches to Congestion Control, Traffic-
Aware Routing, Admission Control, Quality of Service: Application
Requirements, Traffic Shaping.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Internetworking: Tunneling, The Network layer in the Internet: The IP
Version 4 Protocol, IP Addresses, IP Versions 6, Internet Control Protocols.
Transport Layer: The Transport Service: Services provided to the Upper
Layers, Transport Service Primitives, Elements of Transport Protocols:
Addressing, The Internet Transport protocols: UDP and TCP protocols.2022-2023 137
UNIT 5: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Application Layer: Domain Name System: The DNS Name Space, Domain
Resource Records, Name Servers, Electronic Mail: Architecture and Services,
The User Agent, Message Formats, Message Transfer, Final Delivery, WWW:
Architectural Overview, Static Web Pages, Dynamic Web Pages and Web
Applications, HTTP.
Network Security: Cryptography – Introduction to Cryptography,
Substitution Ciphers, Transposition Ciphers, One-Time Pads, Two
fundamental Cryptographic Principles.
Text Books:
1. Andrew S Tanenbaum, David. J. Wetherall, Computer Networks, 5
th
Edition, Pearson Education/PHI.
Reference Books:
1. S. Keshav, An Engineering Approach to Computer Networks, 2nd Edition,
Pearson Education.
2. Behrouz A.Forouzan, Data Communications and Networking, 5 th Edition,
TMH.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.mheducation.com/highered/product/data-communications-
networking- forouzan/M9780073376226.html
2. NPTEL: Computer Science and Engineering - NOC:Computer Networks
and Internet Protocol
3. https://a.impartus.com/ilc/#/course/612379/990
4. e-PGPathshala (inflibnet.ac.in)
5. Fundamentals of Network Communication Course (CU System) |
Coursera
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the basics of computer networks, networking devices and
protocols.
2. Examine the functionalities of different layers of OSI and TCP/IP
reference models.
3. Analyze the performance of data link layer and MAC layer protocols.
4. Acquire the knowledge of network layer services and apply the same for
different applications.
5. Interpret the services offered by transport entities and transport protocols.
6. Determine various application layer protocols in real time and to
understand basics of Network Security.138 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 125CX 3 0 0 3
MACHINE LEARNING
(Common to CSE, CSE (Data Science) & CSE (AI & ML))
Prerequisites: Probability and Statistics
Course Objectives:
1. To be able to identify machine learning problems corresponding to
different applications.
2. To understand various machine learning algorithms along with their
strengths and weaknesses.
3. To understand the basic theory underlying machine learning.
4. To introduce Decision Tree learning, Instance Based Learning techniques.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: Well posed learning problems, designing a learning system
Perspectives and issues in machine learning, Types of learning.
Concept Learning : Concept learning task, Concept Learning as search
through a hypothesis space, Finding maximally specific hypotheses, Version
spaces and the candidate elimination algorithm, Remarks on them, Inductive
Bias.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Decision Tree Learning: Decision Tree representation and learning
algorithm, appropriate problems for Decision Tree Learning, Hypothesis space
search in Decision Tree Learning, Inductive bias in Decision Tree Learning:
Occam’s razor, Issues in Decision Tree Learning.
Artificial Neural Networks: Introduction, The Neuron Model, Activation
Functions, Neural Network Architecture: Single-Layer Feed-Forward
Networks, Multi-Layer Feed-Forward Networks.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Support Vector Machines: Introduction, Linear Classifier, Non-linear
Classifier, Training SVM, Support Vector Regression.
Bayesian Learning: Bayes theorem and concept learning, Minimum
Description Length Principle, Bayes optimal classifier, Gibbs Algorithm,
Naïve Bayes Classifier, The EM algorithm.
UNIT 4: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Computational Learning Theory: PAC Hypothesis, Sample complexity for
finite and infinite hypothesis spaces, Mistake bound model.2022-2023 139
Instance – Based Techniques: K-nearest neighbor Learning, Locally
Weighted Regression, Radial Basis Function, Case Based reasoning, Remarks
on Lazy vs Eager learning.
UNIT 5: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Genetic Algorithm: Biological motivation, Representing Hypothesis, Genetic
Operators, Fitness function and selection, Hypothesis space search, Genetic
Programming, Models of Evolution and Learning, Parallelizing Genetic
Algorithms.
Text Book:
1. Tom M. Mitchell, Machine Learning, McGraw Hill Education, Edition
2013
Reference Books:
1. Saroj Kaushik, Artificial Intelligence, CENGAGE Learning, 2011.
2. Trevor Hasti, Robert Tibshirani and Jerome Friedman, The Elements of
Statistical Learning, 2
nd Edition, Springer Series in Statistics, 2001.
3. William W Hsieh, Machine Learning Methods in the Environmental
Sciences, Neural Networks and Kernels,Cambridge University Press.
4. Stephen Marsland, Machine Learning - An Algorithmic Perspective, CRC
Press, 2009.
Online Resources:
1. http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~tom/
2. http://www.holehouse.org/mlclass/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Gain knowledge on the basic theory in machine learning.
2. Understand machine learning problems corresponding to different
applications.
3. Create solutions with Decision trees and Bayesian classifiers for various
business problems.
4. Implement the instance-based learning and analytic learning for suitable
applications.
5. Apply Genetic algorithms and Reinforcement learning on real-world
applications
6. Design applications using real datasets and evaluate the performance of
the different algorithms.
k  k  k140 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 125BR 3 0 0 3
ADV ANCED COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE
(Professional Elective- 1)
(Common to CSE & IT)
Prerequisites: Computer Organization and Architecture, Operating Systems
Course Objectives:
1. To impart the concepts and principles of parallel and advanced computer
architectures.
2. To develop the design techniques of Scalable and multithreaded
Architectures.
3. To Apply the concepts and techniques of parallel and advanced computer
architectures to design modern computer systems.
UNIT 1: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Theory of Parallelism Parallel computer models: The State of Computing,
Multiprocessors and Multicomputers, Multivector and SIMD Computers,
PRAM and VLSI models, Architectural development tracks.
Program and network properties: Conditions of parallelism, Program
partitioning and Scheduling, Program flow Mechanisms, System interconnect
Architectures.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Principles of Scalable performance: Performance metrics and measures,
Parallel Processing applications, Speed up performance laws, Scalability
Analysis and Approaches, Hardware Technologies: Processes and Memory
Hierarchy: Advanced Processor Technology, Superscalar and Vector
Processors, Memory Hierarchy Technology, Virtual Memory Technology.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Bus Cache and Shared memory: Backplane bus systems, Cache Memory
organizations, Shared Memory Organizations, Sequential and weak
consistency models.
Pipelining and super scalar techniques: Linear Pipeline Processors, Non-
Linear Pipeline Processors, Instruction Pipeline design, Arithmetic pipeline
design, superscalar superpipeline design.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Parallel and Scalable Architectures: Multiprocessors and Multi-
computers:  Multiprocessor system interconnects, cache coherence and
synchronization mechanism, Three Generations of Multicomputer, Message-
passing Mechanisms.2022-2023 141
Multivector and SIMD computers: Vector Processing Principles,
Multivector Multiprocessors, Compound Vector processing, SIMD computer
Organizations, The connection machine CM-5.
UNIT 5: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Scalable, Multithreaded and Data Flow Architectures: Latency-hiding
techniques, Principles of Multithreading, Fine-Grain multicomputers, Scalable
and multithreaded Architectures, Dataflow and hybrid Architectures.
Text Books:
1. Advanced Computer Architecture Second Edition, Kai Hwang, Tata
McGraw Hill Publishers.
Reference Books:
1. Computer Architecture, Fourth edition, J. L. Hennessy and D.A. Patterson.
ELSEVIER.
2. Advanced Computer Architectures, S.G . Shiva, Special Indian edition,
CRC, Taylor &Francis.
3. Introduction to High Performance Computing for Scientists and
Engineers, G . Hager and G . Wellein, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group.
4. David E. Culler and Jaswinder Pal singh with Anoop Gupta, Parallel
Computer Architecture, A Hardware / Software Approach, Elsevier.
Online Resources:
1. http://acs.pub.ro/~cpop/SMPA/Computer%20Architecture%20A%
20Quantitative%20Approac h%20(5th%20edition).pdfhttp://courses.
cs.tamu.edu/ejkim/614/
2. https://www.cs.ucf.edu/~dcm/Teaching/CDA5106-Fall2015/Slides/
3. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_cs07/preview
4. www.coursera.org
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the basic principles of computer design.
2. Identify the various computational models and computer architectures.
3. Gain knowledge on concepts of parallel computer models.
4. Predict the challenges of realizing different kinds of parallelism and
leverage them for performance advancement
5. Apply the concept of memory hierarchy for efficient memory design.
6. Analyze the Scalable Architectures, Pipelining, Superscalar processors,
multiprocessors.
k  k  k142 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 125CE 3 0 0 3
DATA MINING
(Professional Elective-1)
(Common to CSE & IT)
Prerequisites: Probability and Statistics, Database Management Systems
Course Objectives:
1. Learn data mining concepts and understand association rules mining.
2. Discuss classification algorithms learn how data is grouped using
clustering techniques.
3. To develop the abilities of critical analysis to data mining systems and
applications.
4. To implement practical and theoretical understanding of the technologies
for data mining.
5. To understand the strengths and limitations of various data mining models.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Data Mining: What is Data Mining, Definition, KDD, Data
Mining Architecture, Challenges, Data Mining Functionalities, Data Mining
Task Primitives, and Major Issues in Data Mining.
Data Pre-processing: Data Cleaning, Data Integration and Transformation,
Data Reduction: Dimensionality Reduction, Feature Subset Selection,
Discretization and Binarization, Measures of Similarity and Dissimilarity –
Basics, Similarities and dissimilarities between Simple Attributes and Data
Objects.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Association Rules: Problem Definition, Frequent Item Set Generation, The
APRIORI Algorithm, Support and Confidence Measures, Association Rule
Generation, FP- Growth Algorithm, Mining various kinds of Association rules,
Compact Representation of Frequent Item sets: Maximal Frequent Item Sets,
Closed Frequent Item Sets.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Classification and Prediction : Problem Definition, General Approaches to
solving a classification problem, Evaluation of classifiers, Classification
Techniques, Decision Tree Induction, Naive Bayes Classifier, Bayesian Belief
Networks, K–Nearest neighbor classification– Algorithm and Characteristics,
Prediction: Linear, Logistic Regressions.2022-2023 143
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Clustering: Cluster Analysis, Categorization of Major Clustering Methods,
Partitioning Clustering - K-Means Algorithm, K- Means Additional issues,
PAM Algorithm, Hierarchical Clustering : Agglomerative Methods and
divisive methods, Basic Agglomerative Hierarchical Clustering, Specific
techniques: MIN, MAX, Group Average, Ward’s method and Centroid
methods Key Issues in Hierarchical clustering, Strengths and Weakness,
Outlier Detection.
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Mining Time Series and Sequence Data:Mining Time-Series Data, Mining
Sequence Patterns in Transactional Databases.
Mining Multimedia, Text and Web Data: Multimedia Data Mining, Text
Mining, Mining the World Wide Web.
Text Books:
1. Jiawei Han and Michelinen Kamber, Data Mining-Concepts and
Techniques, 2012, 3
rd Edition, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Elsevier.
2. Pang-Ning Tan, Vipin Kumar and Michael Steinbanch, Introduction to
Data Mining, Pearson Education.
Reference Books:
1. Arun K Pujari, Data Mining Techniques, 3 rd Edition, Universities Press.
2. Pualraj Ponnaiah, Data Warehouse Fundamentals by Wiley- Interscience
Publication.
3. VikaramPudi and P Radha Krishna, Data Mining by Oxford University
Press.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.kdnuggets.com/websites/index.html
2. https://www.ngdata.com/data-mining-resources.
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the fundamental concepts and tasks of data mining.
2. Perform the pre-processing of data.
3. Formulate the association rules using different algorithms.
4. Evaluate various classifiers.
5. Analyze different clustering techniques.
6. Understand the mining of temporal and multimedia data.
k  k  k144 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 125CC 3 0 0 3
COMPUTER GRAPHICS
(Professional Elective-1)
(Common to CSE, CSE (Data Science), CSE (AI & ML) & IT)
Prerequisites: Programming for Problem Solving
Course Objectives:
1. To understand the basics of computer graphics, different graphics systems
and applications of computer graphics.
2. To analyze various algorithms for scan conversion and filling of basic
objects  and their comparative analysis.
3. To apply the concepts of clipping, shading to view data with pictorial
representation.
4. Explore projections, visible surface detection techniques for display of
2D and 3D scene.
5. Apply Rendering on projected objects in 2D, use of illumination models,
geometric transformations and animation techniques.
UNIT 1: (~12 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: Application areas of Computer Graphics, overview of graphics
systems, video-display devices, raster-scan systems, random scan systems,
graphics monitors and work stations and input devices.
Output primitives: Points and lines, line drawing algorithms, mid-point
circle. Filled area primitives: Scan line polygon fill algorithm, boundary fill
and flood-fill algorithms.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
2-D Geometrical transforms: Translation, scaling, rotation, reflection and
shear transformations, matrix representations and homogeneous coordinates,
composite transforms, transformations between coordinate systems.
2-D Viewing: The viewing pipeline, viewing coordinate reference frame,
window to view-port coordinate transformation, viewing functions, Cohen
Sutherland and Cyrus-beck line clipping algorithms, Sutherland –Hodgeman
polygon, clipping algorithm.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
3-D Geometric transformations: Translation, rotation, scaling, reflection
and shear transformations, composite transformations.
3-D viewing: Viewing pipeline, viewing coordinates, view volume and
general projection transforms and clipping.2022-2023 145
UNIT 4: (~8 Lecture Hours)
3-D Object representation: Polygon surfaces, quadric surfaces, Basic
illumination models, polygon rendering methods: Constant Intensity shading,
Gouraud Shading, Phong shading, Fast phong shading. Visible surface
detection methods: Classification, back-face detection, depth-buffer, scan-
line, depth sorting, BSP-tree methods, area sub-division and octree methods.
UNIT 5: (~5 Lecture Hours)
Computer Animation: Design of animation sequence, general computer
animation functions, raster animation, computer animation languages, key
frame systems, motion specifications.
Text Books:
1. Donald Hearn and M. Pauline Baker, Computer Graphics C version, 2 nd
Edition, Pearson Education.
2. VanDam, Feiner and Hughes, Computer Graphics Principles & practice,
Foley, 2nd Edition, Pearson Education.
Reference Books:
1. Zhigand xiang, Roy Plastock and Schaum’s outlines, Computer Graphics,
2nd Edition, Tata Mc- Graw hill.
2. David F Rogers, Procedural elements for Computer Graphics, 2 nd Edition,
Tata Mc Graw hill.
3. Neuman and Sproul, Principles of Interactive Computer Graphics, TMH.
4. Shalini Govil and Pai, Principles of Computer Graphics, Springer, 2005.
Online Resources:
1. http://www.svecw.edu.in/Docs%5CCSECGLNotes2013.pdf
2. http://www.jimssouthdelhi.com/studymaterial/BCA5/BCA-503.pdf
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Learn the basics of computer graphics and graphics display devices.
2. Understand different types of graphics drawing algorithms and two
dimensional transformations.
3. Familiarize the techniques of clipping, three dimensional graphics and
three dimensional transformations.
4. Design, develop and test various techniques which includes modelling,
rendering and shading.
5. Apply the basic techniques of animation.
6. Work in computer aided design for content presentation.
k  k  k146 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 125BA  3 0 0 3
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
(Professional Elective-1)
(Common to CSE, CSE(Data Science) & IT)
Prerequisites: Data Structures, Discrete Mathematics
Course Objectives:
1. To learn the difference between optimal reasoning vs human-like
reasoning.
2. To understand the notions of state space representation, exhaustive search,
heuristic search.
3. To learn different knowledge representation techniques.
4. To understand the applications of AI like Game Playing and Expert
Systems.
5. To introduce the concept of Machine Learning.
UNIT 1: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: History, Intelligent Systems, Foundations of AI, Sub areas of
AI & Applications. Problem Solving - State-Space Search and Control
Strategies, General Problem Solving Techniques, Characteristics of Problem,
Exhaustive Searches, Heuristic Search Techniques, Iterative-Deepening A*,
Constraint Satisfaction. Game Playing, Bounded Look-ahead Strategy and
use of Evaluation Functions, Alpha-Beta Pruning.
UNIT 2: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Logic Concepts and Logic Programming: Introduction, Propositional
Calculus, Propositional Logic, Natural Deduction System, Axiomatic System,
Semantic Tableau System in Propositional Logic, Resolution Algorithm,
Predicate Logic, Logic Programming.
UNIT 3: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Knowledge Representation:  Introduction, Approaches to Knowledge
Representation, Knowledge Representation using Semantic Network,
Extended Semantic Networks for KR, Knowledge Representation using
Frames.
Advanced Knowledge Representation Techniques:  Case Grammars,
Semantic Web.2022-2023 147
UNIT 4: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Uncertainty Measure - Bayesian Belief Networks, Certainty Factor Theory,
Dempster-Shafer Theory. Introduction to Machine Learning: Machine
Learning Systems, Supervised and unsupervised learning.
UNIT 5: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Expert System and Applications:  Introduction, Phases in Building Expert
Systems, Expert System Architecture, Expert Systems Vs Traditional Systems,
Rule based Expert Systems, Truth Maintenance Systems, Applications of
Expert Systems, List of Shells and Tools.
Text Books:
1. Saroj Kaushik, Artificial Intelligence, Cengage Learning, 2011.
Reference Books:
1. Rich, Knight, Nair: Artificial intelligence, Tata McGraw Hill, 3
rd Edition,
2009.
2. Eugene Charniak, Introduction to Artificial Intelligence, Pearson, 2007.
3. Dan W.Patterson, Introduction to Artificial Intelligence and Expert
Systems, PHI, 1990.
4. George Fluger, Artificial Intelligence, 5 th Edition, Pearson.
Online Resources:
1. http://www.vssut.ac.in/lecture_notes/lecture1428643004.pdf
2. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/
3. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cs18/preview
4. https://www.edx.org/course/artificial-intelligence-ai-columbiax-csmm-
101x-4
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the basics of AI and to formulate efficient problem space
and select a search algorithm for a problem.
2. Apply AI techniques to solve problems related to Game playing, Expert
systems.
3. Understand and apply Logic programming in problem solving.
4. Represent knowledge using appropriate techniques.
5. Interpretation of probabilistic and logical reasoning in knowledge base.
6. Understand the concepts of machine learning.
k  k  k148 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code:125DD  3 0 0 3
PRINCIPLES OF PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES
(Professional Elective- 2)
(Common to CSE & IT)
Prerequisites: Object Oriented Programming through JA V A
Course Objectives:
1. To introduce the various programming paradigms.
2. To understand the evolution of programming languages.
3. To understand the concepts of OO languages, functional languages,
logical, and scripting languages.
4. To introduce the principles and techniques involved in the design and
implementation of modern programming languages.
5. To introduce the concepts of concurrency control and exception handling.
6. To introduce the concepts of ADT and OOP for software development.
UNIT1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Preliminary Concepts: Reasons for Studying Concepts of Programming
Languages, Programming Domains, Language Evaluation Criteria, Influences
on Language Design, Language Categories, Language Design Trade-Offs,
Implementation Methods, Programming Environments
Syntax and Semantics : General Problem of Describing Syntax and
Semantics, Formal Methods of Describing Syntax, Attribute Grammars,
Describing the Meanings of Programs.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Names, Bindings, and Scopes- Introduction, Names, Variables, Concept of
Binding, Scope, Scope and Lifetime, Referencing Environments, Named
Constants
Data Types-Introduction, Primitive Data Types, Character String Types, User
Defined Ordinal Types, Array, Associative Arrays, Record, Union, Tuple
Types, List Types, Pointer and Reference Types, Type Checking, Strong
Typing, Type Equivalence
Expressions and Statements-Arithmetic Expressions, Overloaded Operators,
Type Conversions, Relational and Boolean Expressions, Short Circuit
Evaluation, Assignment Statements, Mixed-Mode Assignment
Control Structures –Introduction, Selection Statements, Iterative Statements,
Unconditional Branching, Guarded Commands.2022-2023 149
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Subprograms and Blocks- Fundamentals of Sub-Programs, Design Issues
for Subprograms, Local Referencing Environments, Parameter Passing
Methods, Parameters that Are Subprograms, Calling Subprograms Indirectly,
Overloaded Subprograms, Generic Subprograms, Design Issues for Functions,
User Defined Overloaded Operators, Closures, Coroutines
Implementing Subprograms- General Semantics of Calls and Returns,
Implementing Simple Subprograms, Implementing Subprograms with Stack-
Dynamic Local Variables, Nested Subprograms, Blocks, Implementing
Dynamic Scoping.
Abstract Data Types- The Concept of Abstraction, Introductions to Data
Abstraction, Design Issues, Language Examples, Parameterized ADT,
Encapsulation Constructs, Naming Encapsulations.
UNIT 4: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Concurrency- Introduction, Introduction to Subprogram Level Concurrency,
Semaphores, Monitors, Message Passing, Java Threads, Concurrency in
Function Languages, Statement Level Concurrency. Exception Handling and
Event Handling: Introduction, Exception Handling in Ada, C++, Java,
Introduction to Event Handling, Event Handling with Java and C#.
UNIT5: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Functional Programming Languages- Introduction, Mathematical
Functions, Fundamentals of Functional Programming Language, LISP,
Support for Functional Programming in Primarily Imperative Languages,
Comparison of Functional and Imperative Languages
Logic Programming Language- Introduction, an Overview of Logic
Programming, Basic Elements of Prolog, Applications of Logic Programming.
Scripting Language- Pragmatics, Key Concepts, Case Study: Python – Values
and Types, Variables, Storage and Control, Bindings and Scope, Procedural
Abstraction, Data Abstraction, Separate Compilation.
Text Books:
1. Robert .W. Sebesta, Concepts of Programming Languages, 10
th Edition,
Pearson Education.
2. D. A. Watt, Programming Language Design Concepts, Wiley India
Edition.
Reference Books:
1. A.B. Tucker, R.E. Noonan, Programming Languages, TMH.
2. K. C. Louden and K A Lambert., Programming Languages, 3rd edition,
Cengage Learning.150 Computer Science and Engineering
3. C Ghezzi and M Jazayeri, Programming Language Concepts, Wiley India.
4. Ravi Sethi, Programming Languages, 2 nd Edition, Pearson.
5. Arvind Kumar Bansal, Introduction to Programming Languages, CRC
Press.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.ime.usp.br/~alvaroma/ucsp/proglang/book.pdf
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102067
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to:
1. Express syntax and semantics in formal notation.
2. Apply a suitable programming paradigm for the application
3. Compare the features of various programming languages.
4. Understand the programming paradigms of modern programming
languages.
5. Understand the concepts of ADT and OOP.
6. Correlate different language paradigms and evaluate their relative
benefits.
k  k  k2022-2023 151
III Year B.Tech CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 125EQ  3 0 0 3
SOFTWARE TESTING METHODOLOGIES
(Professional Elective - 2)
Prerequisites: Software Engineering
Course Objectives:
1. To understand and identify various software testing problems, and solve
these problems by designing and selecting software test models.
2. To provide knowledge of the concepts in software testing such as testing
process, criteria, strategies, and methodologies.
3. To gain the ability to apply software testing methods and software testing
tools for software projects.
4. To develop skills in software test automation and management using the
latest tools.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction : Purpose of testing, Dichotomies, model for testing,
consequences of bugs, taxonomy of bugs.
Flow graphs and Path testing : Basics concepts of path testing, predicates,
path predicates and achievable paths, path sensitizing, path instrumentation.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Transaction Flow Testing : transaction flows, transaction flow testing
techniques.
Dataflow testing: Basics of dataflow testing, strategies in dataflow testing,
application of dataflow testing.
Domain Testing: domains and paths, Nice & ugly domains, domain testing,
domains and interfaces testing, domains and testability.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Paths, Path products and Regular expressions : path products & path
expression, reduction procedure, applications, regular expressions & flow
anomaly detection.
Logic Based Testing: overview, decision tables, path expressions, KV charts,
specifications.
UNIT 4: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
State, State Graphs and Transition testing: State graphs, good & bad state
graphs, state testing, Testability tips.152 Computer Science and Engineering
Implementation : Overview, Strategies for Programmers, Strategies for
Independent Testers.
UNIT5: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Graph Matrices and Application : Matrix of graph, relations, power of a
matrix, node reduction algorithm, building tool (Student should be given an
exposure to a tool like JMeter or Win-runner).
Text Books:
1. Boris Beizer, Software Testing Techniques, 2
nd Edition, Dreamtech.
2. Dr. K.V .K. K.Prasad, Software Testing Tools, Dreamtech.
Reference Books:
1. Brian Marick The craft of software testing, Pearson Education.
2. Oreille, Software Testing Techniques, SPD.
3. Edward Kit, Software Testing in the Real World, Pearson.
4. Perry, John Wiley, Effective methods of Software Testing.
5. Meyers, John Wiley, Art of Software Testing.
Online Resources:
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_cs81/preview
2. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_cs91/preview
3. https://www.coursera.org/learn/introduction-software-testing#syllabus
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to:
1. Understand basic terminology of software testing.
2. Acquire the knowledge of various software testing techniques.
3. Determine the Logic testing & Specifications to uncover anomaly
detections as early as possible.
4. Gain insight on implementation of various testing strategies & tips along
with graphs.
5. Ability to design and develop the test cases & test scripts for software
projects with the help of software testing tools.
6. Gain proficient knowledge in software manual and test automation.
k  k  k2022-2023 153
III Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 125CA  3 0 0 3
CLOUD COMPUTING
(Professional Elective-2)
(Common to CSE, CSE(Data Science), CSE(AI & ML) & IT)
Prerequisites: Operating Systems and Computer Networks
Course Objectives:
1. To explain evolving computer model called cloud computing.
2. To introduce the various levels of services that can be achieved by cloud.
3. To describe the security aspects of cloud.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: Cloud computing at a glance, Historical developments,
Building cloud computing environments.
Cloud Computing Architecture: The cloud reference model, Types of
clouds, Economics of the cloud, Open challenges.
UNIT 2: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Virtualization: Characteristics of virtualized environments, Taxonomy of
virtualization techniques, Virtualization and cloud computing, Pros and cons
of virtualization, Technology examples- Xen,VMware, Microsoft Hyper-
V .Migrating into a Cloud, Virtual Machines Provisioning and Migration
Services.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Cloud Platforms in Industry: Amazon web services, Google App Engine,
Microsoft Azure, Aneka- Integration of private and public cloud.
Cloud Programming and Software Environments: Programming Support
for Google App Engine: Programming the Google App Engine, Google File
System(GFS), BigTable, Google’s NOSQL System, Chubby, Google’s
Distributed Lock Service, Programming on Amazon AWS and Microsoft
Azure: Programming on Amazon EC2, Amazon Simple Storage Service(S3),
Amazon Elastic Block Store(EBS) and SimpleDB, Microsoft Azure
Programming Support.
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Security in the Cloud: Cloud Security Challenges, Software-as-a-Service
Security.
Secure Distributed Data Storage in Cloud Computing: Cloud
Storage:fromLANs TOWANs, Technologies for Data Security in Cloud
Computing.154 Computer Science and Engineering
Data Security in the Cloud: The Current State of Data Security in the Cloud,
Cloud Computing and Data Security Risk, Cloud Computing and Identity,
The Cloud, Digital Identity, and Data Security, Content Level Security –
Pros and Cons.
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
SLA Management: Traditional Approaches to SLO Management, Types of
SLA, Life Cycle of SLA, SLA Management in Cloud, Automated Policy-
based Management.
Advanced Topics in Cloud Computing: Energy Efficiency in Clouds:
Energy-Efficient and Green Cloud Computing Architecture, Market Based
Management of Clouds: Market-Oriented Cloud Computing, A Reference
Model for MOCC, Technologies and initiatives Supporting MOCC, Federated
Clouds/Inter Cloud: Characteristics and Definition, Cloud Federation Stack.
Text Books:
1. Rajkumar Buyya, Christian Vecchiola and S.Thamarai Selvi, Mastering
Cloud Computing: Foundations and Applications Programming,
McGrawHill Education, 2013.
2. Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and Andrzej, Cloud Computing:
Principles and paradigms Wiley, 2011.
3. JohnW. Rittinghouse and James F.Ransome, Cloud Computing:
Implementation, Management and Security by CRC, 2010.
Reference Books:
1. Kai Hwang, Geoffrey C.Fox, Jack J Dongarra and Elsevier, Distributed
and cloud computing, 2012.
2. A.Kannammal, Fundamentals of Cloud Computing, CL India, 2015.
3. Tim Mather,Subra Kumara swamy and Shahed Latif, Cloud Security and
Privacy, An Enterprise Perspective on Risks and Compliance. By
Publisher: O’ReillyMedia2009.
Online Resources:
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_cs42
2. https://aws.amazon.com/
3. https://azure.microsoft.com/en-in
4. https://cloud.google.com/2022-2023 155
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Articulate the main concepts, key technologies, strengths, and limitations
of cloud computing and Illustrate the broad perceptive of cloud
architecture and model.
2. Apply and design suitable Virtualization concept.
3. Explore some important cloud computing driven commercial systems
such as Google Apps, Microsoft Azure and Amazon Web Services and
design other web cloud applications.
4. Assess Cloud storages systems and Cloud security, the risks involved,
its impact and develop cloud application.
5.
Devise performance negotiations between cloud service providers and
consumers through SLAs.
6. Interpret enterprise level requirements by learning Energy efficient,
Market ready, Federated cloud systems.
k  k  k156 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 125CJ  3 0 0 3
DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS
(Professional Elective - 2)
(Common to CSE, IT and CST)
Prerequisites: Operating Systems, Database Management Systems
Course Objectives:
1. To understand what is a distributed system and why it is used.
2. To understand IPC, Group Communication & RPC Concepts.
3. To understand the DFS and different Name Services.
4. To understand concepts like virtual time, agreement and consensus
protocols.
5. To understand the concepts of replication and transaction in distributed
environments and associated concepts, namely, concurrency control,
deadlocks and error recovery.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Characterization of Distributed Systems- Introduction, Examples of
Distributed systems, Trends in distributed Systems, Focus on resource sharing,
Challenges, Case study: The World Wide Web.
System models- Introduction, Physical models, Architectural models,
Fundamental models.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Inter Process Communication- Introduction, The API for the Internet
Protocols, External data representation and Marshalling, Multicast
communication.
Remote Invocation- Introduction, Request-reply protocols, Remote
Procedure Call, Remote method invocation, Case study: Java RMI.
UNIT 3: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Distributed File Systems- Introduction, File Service architecture, Case study:
SUN network file system.
Name Services- Introduction, Name Services and the Domain Name System,
Directory Services, Case study: The Global Name Service.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Time and Global States- Introduction, Synchronizing physical clocks,
Logical time and logical clocks, Global states.
Coordination and Agreement- Introduction, Distributed mutual exclusion,
Elections, Coordination and agreement in group communication, Consensus
and related problems.2022-2023 157
UNIT 5: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Distributed Transactions- Introduction, Flat and Nested Distributed
Transactions, Atomic commit protocols, Concurrency control in distributed
transactions, Distributed deadlocks, Transaction recovery.
Replication- Introduction, System model and the role of group
communication, Fault-tolerant services, Case study: The gossip architecture.
Text Books:
1. George Coulouris, J Dollimore, Tim Kindberg and G Blair, Distributed
Systems, Concepts and Design, 5 th Edition, Pearson Education, 2012.
Reference Books:
1. Andrew S.Tanenbaum, Maarten VanSteen, Distributed systems, Principles
and Paradigms, 2nd Edition, PHI.
2. Sukumar Ghosh, Chapman & Hall/CRC, Taylor & Fransis Group,
Distributed Systems, An Algorithm Approach, 2007.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.smartzworld.com/notes/distributed-systems-notes-pdf-ds
2. nptel.ac.in/courses/106106107
3. https://edutainmentzone.blogspot.com › Home › DS › Education
4. https://swayam.gov.in/course/3946-distributed-systems
5. https://www.coursera.org/courses?languages=en & query=distributed
systems
6. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_cs42
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the concepts, challenges of distributed systems and various
system models.
2. Analyze the establishment of Inter process communication and remote
invocation between distributed systems.
3. Comprehend a distributed system with the features that support distributed
file systems and name services.
4. Relate virtual time, agreement and consensus protocols in distributed
systems.
5. Apply and analyze the knowledge of distributed transactions and
replication.
6. Demonstrate the design, implementation and other issues of distributed
systems.
k  k  k158 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12533 0 0 3 1.5
FULL STACK DEVELOPMENT LAB
(Common to CSE, CSE (Data Science), CSE (AI & ML), CST & IT)
Prerequisites: Object Oriented Programming through JA V A
Course Objectives:
1. To gain the knowledge of various Front-End technologies.
2. To Design Front-End of the full stack applications.
3. To understand and develop Back-End applications to connect to databases.
4. To work with different case studies by using frameworks.
List of Experiments:
Week 1:
a) Create a Web Page using HTML which contains a Heading, Image and 2
hyperlinks. Each hyperlink opens a new page in the same web browser.
New page contains “Go Back” link that takes you to the main page.
b) Write a HTML program to create a Registration form, which contains
User Name, Password, Date of Birth, Gender, Mail-id, Contact number,
Address and submit button.
Week 2:
a) Create a web page to demonstrate Position Property in CSS.
b) Create a Newspaper Style Design to print minimum 2 articles using HTML
and CSS.
Week 3:
a) Write a JavaScript program to change the background color after clicking
“change color” button.
b) Write a JavaScript program to validate registration page using regular
expression.
Week 4:
a) Write a code to hide and show an element in a periodic interval without
any action from the user using JQuery.
b) Write a program to create and Build a star rating system using JQuery.
Week 5:
a) Write a program to demonstrate ReactJS Class and Instance.
b) Write a program to create a basic calculator to perform arithmetic
operations using ReactJS.2022-2023 159
Week 6:
a) Demonstrate simple event handling examples using ReactJS.
b) Write a program to create a simple voting application system using
ReactJS.
Week 7:
a) Create a webpage to display “Hello World” using SERVLET.
b) Implement a web application using SERVLET, which takes a name as
input and on submitting it, shows a hello <name> page. It shows start
time at the right top comer of the page and provides a logout button. On
clicking logout button, it should show a logout page with Thank You
<name> message with the duration of usage (hint: Use session to store
name and time).
Week 8:
a) Write a JSP program to find a factorial of the given number.
b) Create a user validation web application using JSP, where the user submits
the login name and password to the server. The name and password are
checked against the data already available in database and if the data
matches, a successful login page is returned. Otherwise show a failure
message to the user.
Week 9:
a) Demonstrate a simple example of Spring web MVC framework.
b) Illustrate how the database is connected in Spring Framework by using a
simple CRUD application.
Week 10:
a) Create a simple example of a hibernate application using eclipse IDE.
b) Create an application to demonstrate Hibernate Query Language.
Week 11 and 12:
CASE STUDY-1: Create a Chat module/Interface using HTML CSS and
JavaScript. The chat interface primarily consists of two segments: the message
header and the chat box.
Message-Header- The message header resides at the top of the chat box. It
includes the user’s name, avatar or profile image, and the user’s last seen.
Last seen is the last time the user was active.
The Chat-Box- The chat box consists of the message page and the message
bottom sections.
l Message page-The message page consists of incoming and outgoing
messages, as well as the avatars of the senders. It also displays the time at
which each message is sent.160 Computer Science and Engineering
l The Message-Bottom-This section contains an input  field where the user
can type in the messages and a send button to send them.
Week 13 and 14:
CASE STUDY-2: Create an online learning platform that uses React JS for
its frontend development. Reacts modular architecture allows it to build
reusable UI components for course listings, interactive quizzes, and user
dashboards. MySQL serves as the database system for storing user profiles,
course data, and learning progress. On the backend, the Spring Framework,
specifically Spring MVC architecture, to handle server-side logic, user
authentication, and course enrollment management.
Text Book:
1. Mayur Ramgir, FullStack Development with Spring MVC, Hibernate,
jquery and BootStrap, Wiley Publications,2020.
2. Uttam K. Roy, Web Technologies, OXFORD University press, 2010.
3. Vasan Subramanian, Pro MERN Stack, APress, second Edition, 2019.
Reference Book:
1. Matt Frisbie, Professional JavaScript for Web Developers, WILEY
Publications, 2020.
2. Terry Ann Felke-Morris, Basics of Web Design, Pearson, Fifth Edition.
3. Alex Banks and Eve Porcello, Learning React, O’Reilly, 2017.
Online Resources:
1. https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/6/tutorial/doc/bnayk.html
2. https://www.w3schools.com/html/default.asp
3. https://www.w3schools.com/css/default.asp
4. https://www.w3schools.com/REACT/DEFAULT.ASP
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Design Front-End of the Full Stack Applications by using HTML and
CSS.
2. Create dynamic web pages with the help of JavaScript and JQuery.
3. Develop interactive User Interfaces with React JS.
4. Implement Back-End programs using Servlets and JSP.
5. Connect databases with server-side applications.
6. Implement the case studies with Spring framework and hibernate.
k  k  k2022-2023 161
III Year B.Tech CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12531  0   0 3 1.5
COMPUTER NETWORKS LAB
(Common to CSE, CSE (Data Science), CSE (AI & ML),CST & IT)
Prerequisites: Programming for Problem Solving
Course Objectives:
1. Understand the functionalities of various layers of OSI model.
2. Analyze flow control mechanisms for the data link layer.
3. Implement various routing algorithms to compute the shortest distance.
4. Understand the network simulator environment.
List of Experiments:
Week 1:
Implement the data link layer framing methods such as character count and
bit stuffing.
Week 2:
Implement the data link layer framing methods such as character stuffing.
Week 3:
Write a program to compute CRC code for the polynomial CRC-12.
Week 4:
Develop a simple data link layer that performs the flow control using the
sliding window protocol, and loss recovery using the Go-Back-N mechanism.
Week 5:
Develop a simple data link layer that performs the flow control using the
sliding window protocol, and loss recovery using Selective Repeat
mechanism.
Week 6:
Implement Dijsktra’s algorithm to compute the shortest path through a
network.
Week 7:
Implement distance vector routing algorithm for obtaining routing tables at
each node.
Week 8:
Implementation of Networking commands like ping, ipconfig, traceroute,
TELNET, nslookup, ARP, RARP etc.162 Computer Science and Engineering
Week 9:
Implement Linux Network Configuration Commands.
a. Configuring NIC’s IP address.
b. Determining IP address and MAC address using if-config command.
c. Changing IP address using if-config command.
Week 10:
Write a program for congestion control using Leaky bucket algorithm.
Week 11:
Install Wireshark and perform the following using Wireshark.
a. Packet Capture Using Wire shark.
b. Starting Wire shark.
c. Viewing Captured Traffic.
d. Analysis and Statistics & Filters.
Week 12:
a. How to run Nmap scan.
b. Operating System Detection using Nmap.
Week 13:
Do the following using NS2 Simulator:
a. NS2 Simulator-Introduction.
b. Simulate to find the Number of Packets Dropped.
c. Simulate to find the Number of Packets Dropped by TCP/UDP.
Week 14:
a. Simulate to Find the Number of Packets Dropped due to Congestion.
b. Simulate to Compare Data Rate & Throughput.
c. Simulate to Plot Congestion for Different Source/Destination.
d. Simulate to Determine the Performance with respect to Transmission of
Packets.
Text Book:
1. Andrew S Tanenbaum, Computer Networks, 5
th Edition, Pearson
Education.
Reference Book:
1. Behrouz A.Forouzan, Data Communications and Networking, 5 th Edition,
TMH, 2013.2022-2023 163
Online Resources:
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc20_cs23/preview
2. https://www.varonis.com/blog/how-to-use-wireshark/
3. https://tools.kali.org/information-gathering/nmap
4. http://intronetworks.cs.luc.edu/current/html/ns2.html
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Implement data link layer functions such as framing methods.
2. Demonstrate error detection at the data link layer.
3. Apply an appropriate algorithm for finding the shortest route in a network.
4. Execute Network Configuration commands.
5. Implement the congestion control mechanisms.
6. Evaluate the network performance by using different network tools
k  k  k164 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12534 0 0 2 1
MACHINE LEARNING LAB
(Common to CSE, CSE (Data Science) & CSE(AI & ML))
Prerequisites: Python Programming
Course Objectives:
1. Familiarize with the basics of Python.
2. Implement different machine learning algorithms and techniques using
Python.
3. Analyze the performance of different machine learning algorithms.
4. To build Machine Learning models for real world problems.
List of Programs:
Week 1:
Getting familiarized with basic concepts like data types, data frames, control
structures, list, tuple dictionary and functions in Python.
Week 2:
Implement FIND-S algorithm for finding the most specific hypothesis based
on a given set of training data samples.
Week 3:
For a given set of training data examples, implement Candidate Elimination
algorithm to output a description of the set of all consistent hypothesis.
Week 4:
Build FIND-S and Candidate-Elimination algorithm on a different dataset.
Week 5:
Implement Decision tree for classification of any given data set.
Week 6:
Implement pruning of Decision tree.
Week 7:
Implement SVM algorithm to classify any given data set.
Week 8:
Implement k-Nearest Neighbour algorithm to classify any given data set.2022-2023 165
Week 9:
Implement the naive Bayesian classifier and compute the accuracy, precision
and recall.
Week 10:
Implement Regression algorithm in order to fit data points.
Week 11:
Implement Radial basis algorithm in order to fit data points.
Week 12:
Implement an algorithm to demonstrate the significance of genetic algorithm.
Text Books:
1. Tom M. Mitchell, Machine Learning, Mc Graw Hill Education, 1997.
2. Sebastian Raschka, Python Machine Learning, PACKT Publishing, 2015.
Reference Books:
1. Kevin Murphy, Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective, MITPress,
2012.
2. Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani and Jerome Friedman, The Elements of
Statistical Learning, 2nd Edition, Springer Series in Statistics, 2001.
3. William W Hsieh, Machine Learning Methods in the Environmental
Sciences, Neural Networks and Kernels, Cambridge University Press.
4. Stephen Marsland, Machine Learning - An Algorithmic Perspective, CRC
Press, 2009.
Online Resources:
1. http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~tom/
2. http://www.holehouse.org/mlclass/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Program using basic features of Python.
2. Apply and analyze concept learning techniques to version spaces.
3. Design statistical and hierarchical models in Machine Learning.
4. Analyze lazy and eager learning algorithms.
5. Identify machine learning techniques appropriate to respective problems.
6. Compare various machine learning algorithms along with their strengths
and weaknesses.
k  k  k166 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126EG  3 0 0 3
MANAGERIAL ECONOMICS AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS
 (Common to CSE, CSE (Data Science), CSE(AI & ML),
CST, ECE, EEE, ETE & IT)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Provide the basic concepts of Managerial economics.
2. Interlink the concepts of Managerial economics for effective business
decision making.
3. Provide Fundamental knowledge in accounting and interpretation of the
statements.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Managerial Economics and Demand Analysis:
Managerial Economics : Introduction to Economics - Definition of
Managerial Economics - Nature and Scope of Managerial Economics -
Multidisciplinary Nature of Managerial Economics.
Demand Analysis: Introduction to Demand - Determinants of demand - Law
of demand, and its Exceptions - Types & Nature of demand - Movement and
Shift of demand curve.
Elasticity of demand: Concept of Elasticity of demand - Types of Elasticity-
Price, Income, Cross and Advertising.
Demand Forecasting : Need for Demand Forecasting - Factors governing
Demand Forecasting - Methods of Demand Forecasting (Survey methods
and Statistical methods.)
UNIT 2: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Production and Cost Analysis:
Production Analysis : Factors of Production - Production Function -
Production function with one variable input - two variable inputs using
Isoquant and Isocosts - Optimal combination of Resources using Isoquants
and Isocosts - Laws of returns.
Cost Analysis: Cost classification - Cost concepts relevant for Managerial
decision making – Cost relationship – Determinants of cost.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Break Even Analysis, Market Structures and Pricing:
Break Even Analysis: Need - Scope and Significance – Assumptions -
Advantages and Limitations - Practical Applications (with simple problems).2022-2023 167
Market Structures : Classification of Markets - Features of Perfect
Competition – Monopoly- Monopolistic - Oligopoly and Duopoly.
Pricing: Pricing Objectives - Methods of Pricing and Pricing strategies.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Financial Accounting:
Financial Accounting: Introduction to Accounting - Double Entry Book-
Keeping - Accounting Concepts and Conventions - Accounting Terminology.
Journal - Ledger - Trial Balance - Final Accounts with Adjustments (Simple
Problems).
UNIT 5: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Financial Analysis and Interpretation:
Ratio Analysis: Need and importance - significance of Ratio Analysis -
Liquidity Ratios - Profitability Ratios - Activity Ratios - Solvency Ratios -
Interpretation of Ratios for decision making (Simple Problems).
Text Books:
1. P L Mehta (2016) Managerial Economics- Analysis, Problems & Cases,
21st Edition, Sultan Chand & Sons.
2. T.S.Grewal (2006) Double Entry Bookkeeping, Sultan Chand & Sons.
Reference Books:
1. D.N.Dwivedi (2016), Managerial Economics, 8 th Edition, Vikas
Publishing House Pvt. Ltd.
2. S.N. Maheshwari, Suneel K Maheshwari and Sharad K. Maheshwari
(2018), Financial Accounting, 6 th Edition, Vikas Publishing House Pvt.
Ltd.
3. I.M.Pandey (2021), Financial Management, 12 th Edition, Pearson.
4. R.L.Varshney and K.L Maheshwari (2004) Managerial Economics,
22nd Revised Edition, Sultan Chand & Sons.
Online Resources:
1. Managerial Economics https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc20_mg67/
preview
2. Financial Accounting http://nptel.ac.in/courses/110107073/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the Basic Concepts of Managerial Economics.
2. Demonstrate the significance of demand, its analysis and forecasting for
decision making.168 Computer Science and Engineering
3. Apply the theory of production function and Cost concepts for problem
solving and decision making.
4. Analyze different market structures & pricing strategies for business
decision making.
5. Evaluate the concepts of Accounting for Business decision making.
6. Interpret the Financial Statements for management decision making.
k  k  k2022-2023 169
III Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126BW  3 0 0 3
AUTOMATA AND COMPILER DESIGN
(Professional Elective–3)
(Common to CSE, CSE (Data Science) & CSE (AI & ML) & IT)
Prerequisites: Discrete Mathematics, Computer Organization and
Architecture
Course Objectives:
1. Understanding finite Automata and its application in phases of
compilation.
2. Describe the steps and algorithms used by language translators.
3. Enumerating top down and bottom up parsing techniques used in the
compilation process.
4. Learning the effectiveness of optimization.
5. Introducing the syntax directed translation and type checking.
6. Understanding intermediate code generation.
UNIT 1:( ~10 Lecture Hours)
Formal Languages and regular expressions : The central concepts of
Automata Theory- Alphabets, Strings, Languages, Finite Automata-NFA, NFA
with epsilon transitions, DFA, Regular Expressions, Conversion of regular
expression to NFA, NFA to DFA.
Chomsky hierarchy of languages and Recognizers, Context Free Grammars,
Derivations, Parse trees, Ambiguity.
UNIT 2: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Compilers: Translators, Compilers and Interpreters,
Structure of a compiler, Retargeting, Bootstrapping, Cross compiler, Compiler
construction tools.
Lexical Analysis –The Role of Lexical Analyzer, Input Buffering,
Specification of Tokens, Recognition of Tokens, The Lexical Analyzer
Generator LEX.
Symbol Table: Introduction, Symbol Table Entries, Operations on the Symbol
Table, Symbol table organization.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Syntax Analysis: Role of Parser, Top Down Parsing : Recursive Descent
Parsing, Predictive Parsing, LL (1) parsing, LL(k) Grammars.
Bottom Up Parsing: Reductions, Handle pruning, Shift Reduce Parsing,
Conflicts during Shift- Reduce parsing, Introduction to LR Parsing SLR,
More Powerful LR Parsers CLR and LALR, The Parser Generator YACC.170 Computer Science and Engineering
UNIT 4: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Semantic Analysis: Syntax Directed Translation: Syntax Directed
Definitions, Evaluation Orders for SDD’s, Applications of Syntax Directed
Translation, Types and Declarations:Type expressions, Type equivalence, Type
checking: Rules for Type checking, Type conversions, Translation of
Expressions: Operations with Expressions, Control flow.
Intermediate Code Generation: Syntax Trees, DAG , Polish notation, Three
Address Code. Run Time Environments: Storage Organization, Stack
Allocation of Space, Heap Management.
UNIT5: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Code Optimization: Basic Blocks and Flow Graphs, Optimization ofBasic
Blocks, Machine Independent Optimizations-The Principal Sources of
Optimizations, Loops Optimization, Machine dependent optimization:
Peephole optimization.
Code Generation : Issues in the Design of a Code Generator, The target
language, A Simple Code Generator, Register Allocation and Assignment.
Text Books:
1. Aho, Ullman, Monica S.Lam, Ravisethi, Compilers Principles,
Techniques and Tools Pearson Eductaion.
2. Sipser, Introduction to Theory of computation. 2
nd Edition, Thomson
Reference Books:
1. K.V .N. Sunitha, Compiler Construction, Pearson India.
2. K.V .N. Sunitha and N. Kalyani, Formal Languages and Automata Theory,
Pearson India.
3. Jean-Paul Tremblay and Paul G Sorenson, The Theory & Practice of
Compiler Writing.
4. Andrew W.Appel, Modern Compiler Construction in C, Cambridge
University Press.
5. V .Raghavan, Principles of Compiler Design, TMH.
Online Resources:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106108113
2. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_cs57/preview
3. https://www.mooc-list.com/course/compilers-theory-and-practice-
udacity
4. https://www.coursera.org/learn/compiler-design
5. https://iitd.github.io/col728/2022-2023 171
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Illustrate the concept of abstract machines and their power to recognize
the languages.
2. Gain the knowledge of tools for different phases of compiler.
3. Demonstrate different parsing methods typically used in compilers.
4. Describe language translation techniques and their applications.
5. Analyze different storage allocation strategies.
6. Understand techniques to improve the efficiency of a compiler and
generate code for target machine.
k  k  k172 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126DR  3 1 0 4
COMPUTER VISION AND PATTERN RECOGNITION
Prerequisites: Linear Algebra and Multivariable Calculus
Course Objectives:
1. Familiarize the students with both the theoretical and practical aspects
of computing with images.
2. Understand the foundation of image formation and analysis.
3. To understand feature extraction techniques such as histogram and color
based analysis, edge detection and shape analysis.
4. To apply basic mathematical morphology concepts and segmentation.
5. To Identify various patterns using classification and clustering techniques.
UNIT 1: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Image Processing: Fundamental steps in Digital image processing,
Components of an image processing system, The Image model and Image
acquisition, Image sampling and quantization, Basic relationships between
pixels.
Image Enhancement in the Spatial Domain: Basic grey-level
transformation, histogram processing, Enhancement using arithmetic and logic
operators.
UNIT 2: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Spatial Filtering: Fundamentals of spatial filtering, smoothing and
sharpening spatial filters, combining the spatial enhancement methods.
Color Image Processing: Color Fundamentals and Color models-The RGB
Color Model, The CMY and CMYK Color Models, The HSI Color Model.
Morphological Image Processing: Preliminaries, Erosion and Dilation,
Opening and Closing, The Hit-or-Miss Transformation, Basic Morphological
Algorithms: Hole filling, connected components.
UNIT 3: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Image Segmentation: Fundamentals, Point, line and Edge detection,
Thresholding, Region based segmentation, Segmentation Using
Morphological Watersheds.
Image Compression: Fundamentals- Coding Redundancy, Spatial and
Temporal Redundancy, Irrelevant Information, Image Compression Models.
Some Basic Compression Methods: Lossless and Lossy Compression,
Huffman Coding, Arithmetic Coding, Run-Length coding, Bit-Plane Coding.2022-2023 173
UNIT 4: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Pattern Recognition: Introduction, Data Structures for Pattern
Representation, Feature Extraction- Principal Component Analysis (PCA),
Feature Selection- Exhaustive Search, Branch and Bound Search, Selection
of Best Individual Features, Sequential Selection, Classification- k Nearest
Neighbour (kNN) Algorithm, Bayes Classifier - Bayes Theorem, Minimum
error rate classifier, Naive Bayes Classifier, Bayesian Belief Network.
UNIT 5: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Clustering In Patterns: The Importance of Clustering, Hierarchical
Algorithms, Divisive Clustering, Agglomerative Clustering, Partitional
Clustering- K-Means Algorithm, Soft Partitioning, Clustering Large Datasets.
Recent Trends in Pattern Recognition: Hand written Digit Recognition,
Emotion Recognition.
Text Books:
1. R C Gonzalez and R E woods, Digital Image Processing, 3
rd Edition,
Addison Pearson.
2. V Susheela Devi and M Narasimha Murthy, Pattern Recognition- An
Introduction, Universities Press.
Reference Books:
1. Richard Szeliski, Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications, 1 st
Edition, Springer.
2. Robert B. Fisher et al, Dictionary of Computer Vision and Image
Processing, 2nd Edition.
3. Julus T. Tou, and Rafel C. Gonzalez, Pattern recognition Principles,
Addision-Wesly Publishing Company.
4. Duda R. O., Hart P. E. and Stork D. G ., Pattern Classification, 2nd Edition,
John Wiley & Sons, 2003.
Online Resources:
1. https://computervisiononline.com
2. http://groups.csail.mit.edu/vision/courses/6.869/materials.html
3. https://in.udacity.com/course/introduction-to-computer-vision—ud810
4. https://www.class-central.com/course/coursera-deep-learning-in-
computer-vision9608174 Computer Science and Engineering
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand fundamental image processing techniques required for
computer vision.
2. Extract features using Histogram Processing, Colour and Shape.
3. Apply basic morphological operations.
4. Employ various edge detection, image compression techniques.
5. Gain practical knowledge and skills about pattern classification
techniques.
6. Evaluate various pattern clustering techniques.
k  k  k2022-2023 175
III Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126CS  3 0 0 3
INFORMATION RETRIEV AL SYSTEMS
(Professional Elective- 3)
Prerequisites: Data Structures, Database Management Systems
Course Objectives:
1. To learn the different strategies for information storage and retrieval.
2. To learn about the various retrieval utilities.
3. To understand indexing and querying in information retrieval systems.
4. To understand the notion of structured and semi structured data.
5. To learn about retrieval models.
UNIT 1: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction, Retrieval strategies: Vector space model.
Probabilistic retrieval strategies: Simple term weights, Non binary
independence model, Language Models.
UNIT 2: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Retrieval Utilities: Relevance feedback, Clustering: Result Set Clustering,
Hierarchical Agglomerative clustering, Clustering Without a Precomputed
Matrix, Querying Hierarchically Clustered Collections, Efficiency Issues,
Regression analysis, Thesauri.
UNIT 3: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Retrieval Utilities: N-grams, Semantic networks, Parsing: Single terms,
Simple Phrases, Complex Phrases.
Cross-Language Information Retrieval: Introduction, Crossing the
language barrier-Query Translation, Document Translation, Phrase
Translation, Choosing Translations, Pruning Translations.
UNIT 4: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Efficiency: Inverted Index, Query Processing: Inverted Index Modifications,
Partial Result Set Retrieval, Vector Space Simplifications, Signature Files,
Duplicate Document Detection.
UNIT 5: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Integrating Structured Data and Text: A Historical Progression, Information
Retrieval as relational application, Semi-structured search using a relational
schema, Mediators.
Distributed Information Retrieval: A Theoretical model of distributed
retrieval, Web Search.176 Computer Science and Engineering
Text Book:
1. David A. Grossman and Ophir Frieder, Information Retrieval-Algorithms
and Heuristics, 2nd Edition, Springer.
Reference Books:
1. Gerald J Kowalski and Mark T Maybury, Information Retrieval Systems,
Springer 2000.
2. Soumen Chakrabarti, Mining the Web: Discovering Knowledge from
Hypertext Data, Morgan- Kaufmann Publishers, 2002.
3. Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan and Hinrich Schutze, An
Introduction to Information Retrieval, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, England, 2009.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.coursera.org/learn/text-retrieval
2. https://web.stanford.edu/class/cs276/
3. https://www.mooc-list.com/tags/information-retrieval
4. https://www.udemy.com/course/information-retrieval-and-mining-
massive-data-sets/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Acquire the knowledge to store and retrieve textual documents using
appropriate strategies.
2. Interpret various retrieval utilities for improving search.
3. Understand the translation schemes of cross-language information
retrieval.
4. Apply indexing and compression of documents to improve space and
time efficiency.
5. Formulate SQL queries for unstructured data.
6. Analyze the concepts of distributed retrieval model.
k  k  k2022-2023 177
III Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126DH  3 0 0 3
SOFT COMPUTING
(Professional Elective- 3)
Prerequisites: Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning
Course Objectives:
1. Acquire the fundamental knowledge in soft computing.
2. Understand and analyze various searching and representations in logic.
3. Analyze the fundamentals of artificial neural network models.
4. Understand the basics of fuzzy sets and fuzzy logic rules.
5. Discuss the basics of genetic algorithms.
UNIT 1: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Soft Computing: Introduction, Hard Computing vs Soft
Computing, Soft Computing Constituents, Machine Learning Basics:
Supervised, Unsupervised and Reinforcement Learning.
Introduction to Fuzzy Logic: Classical Sets (Crisp Sets) Theory: Basic
Definitions and Terminology, Operations, Properties, Crisp Relations and
Operations, Fuzzy Sets Theory: Operations, Fuzzy Relations and
compositions, Types of Membership Functions, Features.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Fuzzy Logic and Inference rules: Introduction, Classical Logic, Multi-
valued Logic, Fuzzy Logic, Fuzzy Propositions, Inference Rules for Fuzzy
Propositions.
Fuzzy Inference Systems: Introduction, Fuzzy Inference System
(Fuzzification, Defuzzification), Types of Fuzzy Inference Engines and its
Implementation, Neuro Fuzzy System.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Single Layer Feed Forward Neural Networks: Introduction, Biological
Neurons, Artificial Neural Networks, ANN Model, Single Layer Feed forward
Neural Network, Applications of NN.
Multi-Layer Feed Forward Neural Networks: Architecture, Learning
Methods, Backpropagation Method, Design Issues of ANN, and Applications.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Radial Basis Function Neural Networks (RBNF): RBNF Introduction,
Architecture, Learning, Comparison of RBNF and FFNN(Feed Forward
Neural Networks), and Applications.178 Computer Science and Engineering
Recurrent Neural Networks: RNN Architecture and Training, Hopfield
Networks, Self-Organizing Neural Networks.
UNIT 5: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Evolutionary Computing: Biological Evolutionary Process,
Paradigms, Strategies, Evolutionary Programming, Advantages and
applications.
Genetic Algorithm Process: GA Introduction, Selection, Encoding of Genetic
Operators, Classification of GA, Applications, Advantages and Disadvantages
of GA.
Text Books:
1. Saroj Kaushik and Sunita Tiwari, Soft Computing Fundamentals,
Techniques and Applications, McGraw Hill, 2018.
Reference Books:
1. Elaine Rich, Kevin Knight and Shivashankar B.Nair, Artificial
Intelligence, 3rd Edition TMH, 2009, rp2017
2. Jyh:Shing Roger Jang, Chuen:Tsai Sun and Eiji Mizutani, Neuro Fuzzy
and Soft Computing, Prentice Hall of India/PHI, 2003.
3. Amit Konar, Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing- Behavioural
and Cognitive Modelling of the Human Brain, CRC press, 1 st Edition,
Taylor and Francis Group, 1999.
4. Hung T Nguyen and Elbert A Walker, A first course in Fuzzy Logic,
CRC Press, 3rd Edition, Taylor and Francis Group, 2006.
5. Fakhreddine Karray and Clarence D Silva, Soft Computing and Intelligent
System Design, Pearson Edition, 2004.
Online Resources:
1. https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B0z1V -RAPGVkT2MyTXlwdE9XWXc
/view?usp=sharing
2. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in.
3. http://www.myreaders.info/html/soft_computing.html.
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Identify artificial intelligence and soft computing techniques in building
intelligent machines.
2. Apply fuzzy logic and reasoning to handle uncertainty.
3. Understand the concept of artificial neural networks.
4. Analyze the various Supervised and Unsupervised learning networks.
5. Understand different operators and basic terminologies of genetic
algorithms.
6. Evaluate different soft computing techniques for suitable applications.2022-2023 179
III Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126EQ  3 0 0 3
AGILE METHODOLOGY
(Professional Elective- 3)
Prerequisites: - Nil -
Course Objectives:
1. Understand the benefits and pitfalls of agile model.
2. Acquire knowledge of agile software development practices and how
small teams can apply them to create high-quality software.
3. Provide a good understanding of software design and a set of software
technologies.
4. Perform detailed examination and demonstration of Agile development
and testing techniques.
5. Gain Agile development and testing.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Extreme Programming (XP) - Agile Development
Why Agile - Understanding Success, Beyond Deadlines, Importance of
Organizational Success, Introduction to Agility, How to Be Agile - Agile
methods, Don’t make your own method, Road to mastery, Understanding XP
(Extreme Programming) - XP life cycle, XP team, XP Concepts, Adopting
XP - Knowing whether XP is suitable, Implementing XP, assessing Agility,
Practicing XP - Thinking - Pair Programming, Energized work, Informative
Workspace, Root cause Analysis, Retrospectives.
UNIT 2: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Collaborating: Trust, Sit together, Real customer involvement, Ubiquitous
language, meetings, coding standards, Iteration demo, Reporting.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Releasing: Bug free Release, Version Control, fast build, continuous
integration, Collective ownership, Documentation, Introduction to bug
tracking tool (Monday.com)
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Planning: Version, Release Plan, Risk Management, Iteration Planning, Slack,
Stories, Estimating, Introduction to project management tool (Atlassian Jira
tool).180 Computer Science and Engineering
UNIT 5: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Developing: Incremental requirements, Customer tests, Test-driven
development, Refactoring, Incremental design and architecture, spike
solutions, Performance optimization, Exploratory testing.
Text Books:
1. James Shore and Shane Warden, The art of Agile Development, 11 th
Indian Reprint, O’Reilly, 2018.
Reference Books:
1. Andrew Stellman and Jennifer Greene, Learning Agile, O’Reilly,
4th Indian Reprint, 2018
2. Venkat Subramaniam and Andy Hunt, SPD, Practices of an Agile
Developer, 5th Indian Reprint, 2015
3. Jim Highsmith, Agile Project Management - Pearson Low price Edition
2004
Online Resources:
1. https://www.coursera.org/learn/agile-project-management
2. https://www.coursera.org/specializations/agile-development
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Realize the importance of interacting with business stakeholders in
determining the requirements for a software system.
2. Perform iterative software development processes: how to plan them,
and how to execute them.
3. Develop techniques and tools for improving team collaboration and
software quality.
4. Perform Software process improvement as an ongoing task for
development teams.
5. Show how agile approaches can be scaled up to the enterprise level.
6. Comprehend and master agile values and principles.
k  k  k2022-2023 181
III Year B.Tech. CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126DY  3 0 0 3
GRAPH THEORY
(Professional Elective- 3)
Prerequisites: Discrete Mathematics, Data Structures, Computer Networks
Course Objectives:
1. To understand and apply the fundamental concepts in graph theory.
2. To apply graph theory-based tools in solving practical problems.
3. Define how graphs serve as models for many standard problems.
4. Students will be able to apply theoretical knowledge to solve realistic
problems networks.
UNIT 1: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Fundamental Concepts: Basic concepts, Graphs, Directed Graphs, Vertex
Degrees and Counting, Paths, Trails, and Cycles, Representing graphs with
matrices, Isomorphism in graphs, Eulerian graphs, Hamiltonian graphs,
Bipartite graphs.
UNIT 2: (~12 Lecture Hours)
Trees and Distance: Basic Properties, Connectedness, Spanning Trees and
Enumeration, Optimization and Trees.
Matchings and Factors: Matchings and Coverings, Algorithms and
Applications, Matchings in General Graphs.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Connectivity and Paths: Cuts and Connectivity, k-Connected Graphs,
Network Flow Problems. Coloring Graph: Vertex Colorings and Upper
Bounds, Structure of K-Chromatic Graphs, Enumerative Aspects.
UNIT 4: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Planar Graphs: Embeddings and Euler’s Formula, Dual of a Planar Graph,
Characterization of Planar Graphs, Parameters of Planarity.
UNIT 5: (~7 Lecture Hours)
Edges and Cycles: Line Graphs and Edge-Coloring, Hamiltonian Cycles,
Planarity, Coloring and Cycles.
Text Books:
1. Douglas B.West, Introduction to GraphTheory, 2
nd Edition, Prentice Hall
of India Private Limited.
2. Narsingh Deo, Graph Theory with Applications to Engineering and
Computer Science, PHI, Private Limited.182 Computer Science and Engineering
Reference Books:
1. Dr. DSC, Discrete Mathematical Structures, 6 th Edition, PRISM
Engineering Education Services
2. L.R.Foulds, Graph Theory Applications, Springer Science and Business
Media, 2012.
3. FrankHarary, GraphTheory, CRCPress, 2018.
4. J.A.Bondy and U.S.R.Murty, GraphTheory with Applications, Springer,
2008.
Online Resources:
1. https://home.iitk.ac.in/~arlal/book/mth202.pdf
2. https://neo4j.com/blog/top-13-resources-graph-theory-algorithms/
3. https://www.udemy.com/graph-theory/
4. https://www.coursera.org/learn/graphs
5. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ma19/course
6. https://www.class-central.com/tag/graph%20theory
7. https://swayam.gov.in/courses/4403-advanced-graph-theory
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the approach to represent the real-world problems in a
graphical way.
2. Write precise and accurate mathematical definitions using graph theory.
3. Apply principles and concepts of graph theory in solving practical
problems.
4. Use knowledge of trees in constructing efficient algorithms.
5. Validate applications using Mathematical Proof.
6. Model real world problems using Graph Theory.
k  k  k2022-2023 183
III Year B.Tech CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12638 0 0 2 1
COMPUTER VISION AND PATTERN RECOGNITION LAB
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Familiarize the students with both the theoretical and practical aspects
of computing with images.
2. Understand the foundation of image formation and analysis.
3. To understand feature extraction techniques such as histogram and color
based analysis, edge detection and shape analysis.
4. To apply basic mathematical morphology concepts and segmentation.
5. To Identify various patterns using classification and clustering techniques.
Week 1: Install and configure computer vision tool/library/framework such
as OpenCV , TensorFlow, or PyTorch.
Week 2: Write program for the following tasks
a) Loading and displaying an image.
b) Reading and writing video files.
c) Image enhancement.
Week 3: Write a program to smooth an image using
a) Gaussian filter and b) Median filter
Week 4: Write a program to apply morphological operations like dilation,
erosion, opening and closing on the given image.
Week 5: Write a program for edge detection using different edge detection
masks.
Week 6: Write a program to implement histogram calculation and equalization
for the given image.
Week 7: Write a program to convert the input image from RGB color space
to CMY and HSV color space.
Week 8: Write a program to apply Hough transformation on the given image
for the detection of lines.
Week 9: Write a program to classify the given images using Naïve Bayesian
classifier.
Week 10: Write a program to segment an image by K-Means clustering.184 Computer Science and Engineering
Week 11: Write a program to reduce dimensionality using PCA for the given
images.
Week 12: Write a program to implement Hand written Recognition (Digit/
Character).
Text Books:
1. Gary Bradski and Adrian Kaehler, Learning OpenCV , O Reilly Media,
Inc., 1st Edition, 2008.
2. Talita Perciano and Alejandro C Frery, Introduction to Image Processing
Using R: Learning by Examples, Springer, 1 st Edition, 2013.
Reference Books:
1. R C Gonzalez and R E woods, Digital Image Processing, Addison
Pearson, 3rd Edition, 2013.
2. David A.Forsyth and Jean Ponce, Computer Vision-A Modern Approach,
PHI, 1st Edition, 2003.
Online Resources:
1. https://atoms.scilab.org/toolboxes/IPCV/1.1
2. https://docs.opencv.org/2.4/doc/tutorials/tutorials.html
3. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in
4. https://www.coursera.org
5. https://in.udacity.com
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand fundamental image processing techniques required for
computer vision.
2. Employ various image enhancement and edge detection techniques.
3. Extract features using Histogram Processing, Color.
4. Apply basic morphological operations and Hough transformation.
5. Evaluate various pattern classification techniques.
6. Analyze segmentation of images by clustering.
k  k  k2022-2023 185
III Year B.Tech CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12628 0 0 2 1
ADV ANCED COMMUNICATION SKILLS LAB
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To address various challenges of communication as well as personality
traits faced by individuals at workplace and organizations through case
studies and interactions.
2. To help the students engage with each other’s confidently through various
discussions and presentations.
3. To help the students write business documents and generate content
effectively.
4. To enhance soft skills among the students and to enable them to
understand its impact on employability.
5. To equip the students with career planning and employability.
1. Fundamentals of Interpersonal Communication Skills (ICS):
Definition of ICS – Types of ICS: Verbal, Written and Non-verbal - Forms
of ICS: Face-to-face conversation: Phone calls, E-mails and Video
conference – Stages of ICS: Acquaintance, Build-up, continuation,
bringing to a close, ending – Principles of ICS – a sender, a receiver,
medium, encoding, decoding and feedback – Strategies for effective ICS
– Objectives of ICS -  Barriers to ICS.
Activities:
l Role plays on Conflict management, Negotiation, Problem solving,
Assertiveness
l Conducting a meeting
l E-mail etiquette and netiquette
l Scenario based Role-plays
l Case study based Role-plays
2. Reading Comprehension Skills (RCS):
Importance of RCS: Understanding grammar, vocabulary and semantics
– Benefits of RCS – strategies to improve RCS: Skimming, Scanning,
Visualization, Summarizing, Questioning, predicting – Essential skills
for RCS: Decoding, Fluency, V ocabulary, Coherence – Schema in reading
through – stories, poetry and dramas.
Activities:
l Paraphrasing the Reading passage.
l Critical Analysis of the Reading passage.
l V ocabulary and Grammar Quizzes/Exercises.186 Computer Science and Engineering
3. Writing Skills (WS):
Importance of WS : The message with clarity and ease to larger audience
– Basic elements of writing : Spelling, Capitalization, Punctuation,
Sentence structure, handwriting – Essential steps of writing : Planning,
Drafting, Sharing, Evaluating, Revising, Editing and Publishing – Types
of writing : Essays-Expository, Descriptive, Persuasive and Narrative;
Journal Writing, reflective Writing – Structure of writing : Process writing:
Paragraph writing, Essay writing; Product writing:  Report writing,
Resume writing and SOP writing.
Activities:
l Drafting a Report.
l Building a Resume.
l Writing Statement of Purpose (SOP)
4. Presentation Skills (PS):
Definition of PS – Types of presentation: Informative, Instructional and
persuasive – Stages of oral presentation: Identifying purpose, planning,
preparation, presenting, concluding and handling Q & A’s – Guidelines
for Power Point presentation:
Content on each slide, font sizes, visual images, number of slides, tools
used for PPT.
Activities:
l Poster Presentation.
l Pecha Kucha Presentation.
l Field Research Project Presentation.
l Project elevator pitch
5. Personal Branding and Self Development (PB&SD):
Definition of Personal Branding – Importance of PB – Self assessment
based on purpose, values, authenticity, strengths achievements and
credentials – ways to create personal branding – Understanding the
importance of soft skills for self-development and professional
development: Communication, being engaged, ability to participate fully,
to think critically, to demonstrate leadership, to develop team building.
Activities:
l Self-Introduction. (personal elevator pitch)
l Mock Interviews.
l Group Discussions.2022-2023 187
Reference Books:
1. T.M.Farhathullah, Communication Skills for Technical Students , Orient
BlackSwan Pvt. Ltd., (2002).
2. Sangeetha Sharma and Binod Mishra, Communication Skills for
Engineers and Scientists , PH1 Learning Pvt.Ltd., (2011).
3. Sanjay Kumar and Pushp Lata, Communication Skills,  Oxford Higher
Education, 2nd Education (2015).
Online Resources:
1. https://onlinecourses.swayam2.ac.in/ntr23_ed43/preview
2. https://onlinecourses.swayam2.ac.in/nou23_cm21/preview
3. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_hs146/preview
4. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_hs115/preview
Course Outcomes:
After the completion of the course, the students will be able to
1. Apply basic communication skills (LSRW) in work-related situations.
2. Acquire, organize, interpret and evaluate information for effective
communications within a group.
3. Demonstrate the ability to combine ideas or information in new ways
and present information on guided and structured format.
4. Make decisions and solve problems by specifying goals, identifying
resources and constraints and evaluating results.
5. Display personal qualities such as responsibility, self-management, self-
confidence, ethical behaviour and respect for self and others.
6. Learn to work cooperatively with people of diverse backgrounds and
abilities, identify group’s goals and values and contribute to a group
process with ideas, suggestions and efforts.
k  k  k188 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127FN  3 0 0 3
FUNDAMENTALS OF MANAGEMENT
(Common to CSE, CSE (Data Science), CSE (AI&ML), CST, ECE, EEE,
ETE & IT)
Prerequisites: Managerial Economics and Financial Analysis
Course Objectives:
1. Educate the importance of Management in Business Decision Making.
2. Inculcate the conceptual aspects required for Managerial Decision
Making.
3. Outline the practical application of Management in Engineering Decision
Making.
UNIT 1: (~09 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Management :
Management: Definition - Nature and Scope – Functions - Managerial Roles
- Levels of Management - Managerial Skills - Challenges of Management -
Evolution of Management - Classical Approach- Scientific Management and
Administrative Theory - The Behavioral approach - The Quantitative approach
- The Systems Approach - Contingency Approach – Corporate Social
Responsibility of Business.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Planning and Decision Making
Planning :  Plans - Types of Plans - Planning – Features – Principles of
Planning, Types of Planning  – Concept of MBO - Development of Business
Strategy – Steps of  Strategic Planning Process.
Decision Making – Characteristics of Decision Making - Types of Decisions
- Steps in Decision Making - Approaches to Decision Making – Techniques
of  Individual and Group Decision Making.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Organization and HRM
Organization:  Principles of Organization - Organizational Design –
Departmentation – Delegation –  Centralization, Decentralization and
Recentralization - Organizational Structures -  Concept of Organizational
Culture, Climate and Change.
Human Resource Management: Talent Management – Importance – HRM
- Features – Principles – Job Analysis - Functions of HRM – Recruitment
and Selection - Training and Development -  Performance Appraisal.2022-2023 189
UNIT 4: (~09 Lecture Hours)
Leading and Motivation
Leading: Leadership - Characteristics of a Leader - Power and Authority -
Leadership Styles - Leadership Theories – Trait Theory - Behavioral
Leadership Theories - Situational Leadership Theories (Fielders Contingency
Theory – House path Goal Theory – Life Cycle Situational Theory –  Leader
as Mentor and Coach – Team Leadership.
Motivation - Types of Motivation - Relationship between Motivation and
Performance - Motivational Theories – Abraham Maslow’s Need Hierarchy
Theory - Fredrick Herzberg’s Two Factor Theory – Mc. Gregor Theory X
and Y – Theory Z  - ERG Theory - Mc. Clelland Theory of  Motivation.
UNIT 5: (~09 Lecture Hours)
Communication and Controlling
Communication : Importance - Types - Process - Barriers.
Controlling - Principles of Controlling - Types and Strategies for Control –
- Steps in Control Process - Methods of Budgetary and Non- Budgetary
Controls - Characteristics of Effective Control System – Methods of
Controlling (Traditional and Modern Techniques.)
Text Books:
1. Stephen P. Robbins (2016) Fundamentals of Management, 9
th Edition,
Pearson Education.
2. K. Aswathappa (2023) Organisational Behavior, 14 th Edition, Himalaya
Publishing House.
Reference Books:
1. Y K Bhushan (2016) Fundamentals of Business organization and
Management, 20th Edition, Sultan Chand and Sons.
2. Andrew DuBrin (2012) Management Essentials, 9 th Edition, Cengage
Learning.
3. VSP Rao (2012) Management (Text & cases), 2 nd Edition, Excel Books.
4. James A.F. Stoner, R. Edward Freeman, Danial R.Gilbert (2018)
Management, 6th Edition, Prentice - Hall of India Pvt. Ltd.
5. L.M.Prasad (2019) Organisational Behavior, 6 th Edition, Sultan Chand
and Sons.
Online Resources:
1. Concept of Management and Evolution of Management Thought https:/
/archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/122/108/122108038
2. Principles of Management : https://nptel.ac.in/courses/110107150190 Computer Science and Engineering
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the concept of Management in practical scenario for effective
decision making.
2. Summarize the preparation of effective plans in strategizing the decision
making process.
3. Identify the Organizational Structure and confine authority responsibility
conduct in an organization.
4. Apprehend the human resource management in an organization for its
effectiveness.
5. Assess the role of leader and build motivation to attain the objectives of
an organization.
6. Communicate and Design techniques of controlling in the process of an
organization.
k  k  k2022-2023 191
IV Year B.Tech CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127DS  3 0 0 3
CRYPTOGRAPHY AND NETWORK SECURITY
(Professional Elective-5)
(Common to CSE, CSE(Data Science) & IT)
Prerequisites: Computer Networks
Course Objectives:
1. Understand basics of Cryptography and Network Security.
2. Secure a message over insecure channel by various means.
3. Acquire knowledge on standard algorithms used to provide
confidentiality, integrity and authenticity.
4. Understand the various key distribution and management schemes.
5. Knowledge on IP Security and Email Security.
6. Understand the Security Standards of Web.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Computer and Network Security Concepts: Computer Security Concepts,
Security Attacks, Security Services, Security Mechanisms, A Model for
Network Security.
Classical Encryption Techniques: Symmetric Cipher Models,
Steganography.
Block Ciphers and the Data Encryption Standard: Traditional Block
Cipher Structure, Block cipher design principles, DES, Strength of DES.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Advanced Encryption Standard: AES structure, AES Transformation
Functions, AES Key expansion.
Computer-based Symmetric Key Cryptographic Algorithms:
International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA), RC4.
Block Cipher Operations: Multiple Encryption and Triple DES, Electronic
Code Book mode, Cipher Block Chaining Mode, Cipher Feedback Mode,
Output Feedback Mode, Counter Mode.
Asymmetric Ciphers: Principles of Public key Crypto systems,RSA
Algorithm, Diffie-Hellman Key exchange, Elgamal Cryptographic System.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Cryptographic Data Integrity Algorithms:
Cryptographic Hash functions: Applications of Cryptographic Hash
functions, two simple Hash functions, Requirements and Security, SHA.192 Computer Science and Engineering
Message Authentication Codes : Message Authentication Requirements,
Message Authentication  Functions, Requirements for Message Authentication
Codes, HMAC.
Digital Signatures: Digital Signatures, Elgamal Digital Signature Scheme.
UNIT 4: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Key Management and Distribution: Symmetric Key Distribution Using
Symmetric Encryption, Symmetric Key Distribution Using Asymmetric
Encryption, Distribution of Public Keys, X.509 Certificates, Kerberos.
Transport-Level Security: Web Security Considerations, Transport Layer
Security, HTTPs.
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Electronic Mail Security: Internet Mail Architecture, S/MIME, Pretty Good
Privacy.
Network Security, Firewalls and Virtual Private Network (VPN):
Firewalls, IP Security, Virtual Private Networks(VPNs), Intrusion.
Case Studies on Cryptography: Denial of Service Attacks, Single Sign On,
Cookies & Privacy, Creating a VPN.
Text Books:
1. William Stallings, 7
th Edition, Cryptography and Network Security.
2. Atul Kahate, Cryptography and Network Security, 3 rd Edition, McGraw
Hill.
Reference Books:
1. William Stallings, Network Security Essentials (Applications and
Standards), 4th Edition, Pearson Education.
2. C K Shyamala, N Harini and Dr T Padmanabhan, Cryptography and
Network Security, 1st Edition, Wiley India.
3. Bernard Menezes, Network Security and Cryptography, CENGAGE
Learning.
Online Resources:
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc22_cs03/course
2. https://www.coursera.org/browse/computer-science/computer-security-
and- networks?languages=en
3. https://epgp.inflibnet.ac.in/Home/ViewSubject?catid=fBYckQKJvP3a/
8Vd3L08tQ==
4. https://www.edx.org/course/network-security-2?index=product
&queryID= 71cd7a02f725bb5dc7103bc35b8 eae60 & position =
4&linked_from= autocomplete&c=autocomplete
5. https://www.udemy.com/course/learn-cryptography-basics-in-python/2022-2023 193
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Identify network security threats and indicate countermeasures.
2. Illustrate various cryptographic algorithms.
3. Understand various message authentication algorithms and applications.
4. Relate security solutions for E-Mail and IP layer.
5. Plan security solutions for web and internet.
6. Analyze vulnerabilities using different case studies.
k  k  k194 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127EY  3 0 0 3
DATA SCIENCE USING R
(Professional Elective-4)
Prerequisites: Database Management Systems.
Course Objectives:
1. To provide the knowledge and expertise to become a proficient data
scientist.
2. Demonstrate an understanding of statistics and machine learning concepts
that are vital for data science.
3. To understand statistically to analyze a dataset.
4. Critically evaluate data visualization based on regression and time series
in R.
5. To learn association rule mining and text mining algorithms for analyzing
the dataset.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Data Science: Basics of data Science, Role in a Data Science
Project, stages of a data science project-defining the goal, data Collection
and management.
Introduction to R : Introduction, Downloading and Installing R, IDE and
Text Editors, Handling, Packages in R, Working with Directory, Data Types,
Commands for Data Exploration.
Loading and Handling Data in R : Introduction, working with data from
files, Working with relational databases.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Exploring Data in R : Introduction, Data Frames, R Functions for
Understanding Data in Data Frames, Load Data Frames, Exploring Data,
Data Summary, Finding the Missing Values, Invalid Values and Outliers,
Descriptive Statistics, Spotting Problems In Data with Visualization.
Managing Data in R: Cleaning data, sampling for Modeling and Validation.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Modeling Methods : Choosing and Evaluating models: Mapping problems
to machine learning tasks, Evaluating Models, Validating Models.
Memorization Methods: KDD and KDD Cup 2009, Building Single variable
models, Building models using many variables.
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Linear Regression Using R: Introduction, Understanding Linear Regression,
Building a Linear Regression Model, Making predictions.2022-2023 195
Logistic Regression : Introduction, What Is Regression?, Introduction to
Generalized Linear Model, Logistic Regression, Introduction, Understanding
Logistic Regression, Building a Logistic Regression Model , Making
predictions.
Unsupervised Methods : Cluster analysis – Distances, Preparing the data,
Hierarchical clustering, The k-means algorithm.
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Time Series in R: Introduction, What Is Time Series Data, Similarity Search
in Time series Data, Regression and trend Analysis in Time series data,
Reading Time Series Data, Plotting Time series Decomposing Time Series
Data-Decomposing Seasonal Data, decomposing Non Seasonal data, Seasonal
adjusting, Forecasts using Exponential smoothing, ARIMA models.
Text Books:
1. Nina Zumel and John Mount, Practical Data Science with R, 2
nd Edition,
Manning publications.
2. Seema Acharya, Data Analytics using R, 1 st Edition, McGraw Hill
Education.
Reference Books:
1. Jure Leskovek, Anand Rajaraman and Jeffrey Ullman, Mining of Massive
Datasets, v2.1, Cambridge University Press.
2. Foster Provost and Tom Fawcett, Data Science for Business, What You
Need to Know about Data Mining and Data-Analytic Thinking, O’Reilly.
3. Cathy O Neil and Rachel Schutt, Doing Data Science, Straight Talk from
the Frontline, O Reilly.
4. Samir Madhavan, Mastering Python for Data Science, Packt Publishing,
2015.
Online Resources:
1. http://datasciencemasters.org/.
2. http://learnds.com/
3. https://www.datascienceweekly.org/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand and apply basic concepts of R for data science.
2. Learn and apply the fundamental concepts of data science.
3. Design suitable linear regression models to extract useful information.
4. Develop and analyze regression models for the given data.
5. Handle time series data using ARIMA models.
6. Analyze various association rule mining and text mining algorithms for
better understanding.196 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech CSE  I Semester L T P C
Course Code:127EE  3 0 0 3
INTERNET OF THINGS AND APPLICATIONS
(Professional Elective-4)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To introduce the IoT terminology, technology and its applications.
2. To familiarize the concept of M2M (machine to machine) with necessary
protocols.
3. To introduce the Raspberry Pi platform, that is widely used in IoT
applications.
4. To introduce the implementation of web-based services on IoT devices.
5. To introduce Cloud offerings for IoT.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Internet of Things: Definition and Characteristics of IoT,
Physical Design of IoT- Things in IoT, IoT Protocols, IoT Communication
Models, IoT Communication APIs and IoT enabling Technologies, IoT Levels
& Deployment Templates.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
IoT and M2M: Introduction, M2M, Difference between IoT and M2M,
Difference between SDN and NFV for IoT.
IoT System Management with NETCONF-YANG: Need for IoT System
Management, SNMP, Network Operator Requirements, NETCONF, YANG ,
IoT System Management with NETCONF- YANG .
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Developing Internet of Things : Introduction, IoT Platforms Design
Methodology, Case Study on IoT System for Weather Monitoring, Motivation
for Using Python.
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
IoT Physical Devices and Endpoints: What is an IoT Device – Basic
Building Blocks of an IoT Device - Introduction to Raspberry Pi- Interfaces
(serial, SPI, I2C), Python programming through Raspberry Pi with focus of
interfacing external gadgets, Controlling Output and Reading input from pins,
Other IoT Devices.2022-2023 197
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
IoT Physical Servers and Cloud Offerings: Introduction to Cloud Storage
models and communication APIs, Web server for IoT, Cloud for IoT, Python
Web Application Framework – Django.
Text Books:
1. Arshdeep Bahga and Vijay Madisetti, Internet of Things - A Hands-on
Approach, Universities Press, 2015, ISBN: 9788173719547.
2. Matt Richardson and Shawn Wallace, Getting Started with Raspberry
Pi, O’Reilly (SPD), 2014, ISBN: 9789350239759. Education.
Reference Books:
1. David, Hanes and Salgueiro Gonzalo, IoT Fundamentals: Networking
Technologies, Protocols and Use Cases for the Internet of Things, Pearson
2017.
2. Dirk Slama and Frank Puhlmann, Enterprise IoT: Strategies and Best
Practices for Connected Products and Services, 2015.
Online Resources:
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc22_cs53/preview
2. https://www.coursera.org/courses?query=iot
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the IoT Systems.
2. Learn the concept of M2M (machine to machine) with necessary
protocols.
3. Understand the Raspberry Pi interfaces.
4. Realize the revolution of IoT devices.
5. Identify IoT Systems for communication using Cloud.
6. Apply IoT principles for domain specific applications.
k  k  k198 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech CSE  I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127FB  3 0 0 3
DEVOPS
(Professional Elective-4)
(Common to CSE, CSE (Data Science), CSE (AI & ML), CST & IT)
Prerequisites: Object Oriented Programming through JA V A, Full Stack
Development
Course Objectives:
1. To describe the agile relationship between development and IT operations.
2. To Understand the skill sets and high-functioning teams involved in
DevOps and related methods to reach a continuous delivery capability.
3. To Implement automated system update and DevOps lifecycle.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: Introduction, Agile development model, DevOps, and ITIL.
DevOps process and Continuous Delivery, Release management, Scrum,
Kanban, delivery pipeline, bottlenecks, examples.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Software development models and DevOps: DevOps Lifecycle for Business
Agility, DevOps, and Continuous Testing.
DevOps influence on Architecture: Introducing software architecture, The
monolithic scenario, Architecture rules of thumb, The separation of concerns,
Handling database migrations, Micro services, and the data tier, DevOps,
architecture, and resilience.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to project management: The need for source code control,
The history of source code management, Roles and code, source code
management system and migrations, Shared authentication, Hosted Git
servers, Different Git server implementations, Docker intermission, Gerrit,
The pull request model, GitLab.
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Integrating the system: Build systems, Jenkins build server, Managing build
dependencies, Jenkins plugins, and file system layout, The host server, Build
slaves, Software on the host, Triggers, Job chaining and build pipelines, Build
servers and infrastructure as code, Building by dependency order, Build
phases, Alternative build servers, Collating quality measures.2022-2023 199
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Testing Tools and automation: Various types of testing, Automation of testing
Pros and cons, Selenium - Introduction, Selenium features, JavaScript testing,
Testing backend integration points, Test-driven development, REPL-driven
development.
Deployment of the system: Deployment systems, Virtualization stacks, code
execution at the client, Puppet master and agents, Ansible, Deployment tools:
Chef, Salt Stack and Docker.
Text Books:
1. Joakim Verona. Practical Devops, Second Edition. Ingram short title; 2
nd
edition (2018). ISBN- 10: 1788392574
2. Deepak Gaikwad, Viral Thakkar. DevOps Tools from Practitioner’s
Viewpoint. Wiley publications. ISBN: 9788126579952
Reference Books:
1. Len Bass, Ingo Weber, Liming Zhu. DevOps: A Software Architect’s
Perspective. Addison Wesley; ISBN-10.
Online Resources:
1. https://aws.amazon.com/training/
2. https://www.pluralsight.com/paths/devops
3. https://www.udemy.com/course/devops-bootcamp/
4. https://www.katacoda.com/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Identify components of Devops environment.
2. Describe Software development models and architectures of DevOps.
3. Apply different project management, integration, testing and code
deployment tool.
4. Investigate different DevOps Software development models.
5. Assess various Devops practices.
6. Collaborate and adopt Devops in real-time projects.
k  k  k200 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech CSE  I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127FS  3 0 0 3
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING
(Professional Elective – 5)
Prerequisites: Automata and compiler Design
Course Objectives:
1. To introduce the fundamental concepts and techniques of natural language
processing.
2. To understand the role of syntax, semantics and pragmatics of Text
processing.
3. To acquire knowledge on discourse processing and various approaches
for generating text automatically.
4. To gain an in-depth understanding of the computational properties and
commonly used algorithms for processing linguistic information.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: What is Natural Language Processing (NLP), Origins of NLP,
Language and Knowledge, The Challenges of NLP, Language and Grammar,
Processing Indian Languages, NLP Applications.
Finding the Structure of Words: Words and their Components, Issues and
Challenges, Morphological Models.
Finding the Structure of Documents: Introduction, Methods, Complexity
of Approaches, Performances of the Approaches.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Syntax: Parsing Natural Language, Treebanks: A Data-Driven Approach to
Syntax, Representation of Syntactic Structure, Parsing Algorithms, Models
for Ambiguity Resolution in Parsing, Multilingual Issues: Tokenization, Case
and Encoding, Word Segmentation, Morphology.
UNIT 3: (9 Lecture Hours)
Semantic Parsing: Introduction, Semantic Interpretation, System Paradigms,
Word sense, Predicate- Argument Structure, Meaning Representation.
UNIT 4: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Discourse Processing: Introduction, Cohesion, Reference Resolution,
Discourse Coherence and Structure.
Natural Language Generation: Introduction, Architectures of NLG Systems,
Generation Tasks and Represenations, Applications of NLG .
UNIT 5: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Language Modeling: Introduction, N-Gram Models, Language Model2022-2023 201
Evaluation, Parameter Estimation, Language Model Adaptation, Types of
Language Models- Class-Based Language Models, Syntax-Based Language
Models, Neural Network Language Models, Language-Specific Modeling
Problems.
Text Books:
1. Daniel M. Bikel and Imed Zitouni, Multilingual Natural Language
Processing Applications: From Theory to Practice, Pearson Publication,
2013.
2. Tanvier Siddiqui and U.S. Tiwary, Natural Language Processing and
Information Retrieval, Oxford Higher Education, 2008.
Reference Books:
1. Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin, Speech and Language Processing,
An Introduction to Natural Language Processing, Computational
Linguistics and Speech Recognition, 2011.
2. Steven Bird, Ewan Klein and Edward Loper, Natural Language
Processing with Python, O Reilly, 2009.
Online Resources:
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_cs45/preview
2. Natural Language Processing Specialization (DeepLearning.AI) |
Coursera
3. https://www.udemy.com/topic/natural-language-processing/
4. Stanford CS 224N | Natural Language Processing with Deep Learning
5. CS 626-460: Natural Language Processing (iitb.ac.in)
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will able to
1. Demonstrate knowledge on the fundamental principles of natural
language processing and document structure.
2. Understand the syntax processing and multilingual issues of language
processing.
3. Analyze semantic interpretation and system paradigms for semantic
parsing.
4. Understand discourse processing and computational approaches to natural
language generation.
5. Apply experimental methodology for training, evaluating and generating
NLP systems.
6. Understand state of the art in the core areas of NLP.
k  k  k202 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127BX  3 0 0 3
BIG DATA ANALYTICS
(Professional Elective – 5)
(Common to CSE & CSE(Data Science))
Prerequisites: Database Management Systems
Course Objectives:
1. Know the fundamental concepts of big data.
2. Realize the Hadoop architecture and implementation of Map Reduce
Application.
3. Understand Big Data technologies and NoSQL.
4. To explore tools and practices for working with big data technologies.
UNIT 1: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Big Data: Defining Big Data, Big Data Types, Analytics,
examples, Technologies, The evolution of Big Data Architecture.
Basics of Hadoop: Hadoop Architecture, Main Components of Hadoop
Framework, Analysis Big Data using Hadoop, Hadoop clustering.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
MapReduce: A Weather DataSet, Analyzing the data with Unix Tool,
Analyzing the data using Hadoop, Hadoop streaming, Hadoop Pipes.
The Hadoop Distributed File System: Design of HDFS, Concepts, Basic
File system Operations, Interfaces, Data Flow.
Hadoop I/O: Data Integrity, Compression, File-Based Data Structures.
UNIT 3: (~11 Lecture Hours)
Developing A MapReduce Application: UNIT Tests with MRUNIT,
Running Locally on Test Data.
How MapReduce Works: Anatomy of MapReduce Job Run, Classic
MapReduce, Yarn, Failures in Classic MapReduce and Yarn, Job Scheduling,
Shuffle and Sort, Task Execution.
MapReduce Types and Formats: MapReduce types, Input Formats, Output
Formats.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
NoSQL Data Management: Introduction, Types of NoSQL, Query Model
for Big Data, Benefits of NoSQL, MongoDB.
Hbase: Data Model and Implementations, Hbase Clients, Hbase Examples,
Praxis.
Hive: Comparison with Traditional Databases, HiveQL, Tables, Querying
Data, User Defined Functions.2022-2023 203
Sqoop: Sqoop Connectors, Text and Binary File Formats, Imports, Working
with Imported Data.
UNIT-5: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Pig: Grunt, Comparison with Databases, Pig Latin, User Defined Functions,
Data Processing Operators.
Spark: Installing steps, Distributed Datasets, Shared Variables, Anatomy of
spark Job Run.
Scala: Environment Setup, Basic syntax, Data Types, Functions, Pattern
Matching.
Text Books:
1. Tom White, “Hadoop: The Definitive Guide”, Third Edition, O’Reilley,
2012.
2. V .K. Jain,“Big Data & Hadoop”, Khanna Publishing House, 2017.
Reference Books:
1. P.J Sadalage and M. Fowler, “NoSQL Distilled: A Brief Guide to the
Emerging World of Polyglot Persistence”, Addison-Wesley Professional,
2012.
2. Michael Minelli, Michelle Chambers, and AmbigaDhiraj, “Big Data, Big
Analytics” John Wiley & Sons, Inc.2013.
3. Eric Sammer, “Hadoop Operations”, O’Reilley, 2012.
4. Lars George “HBase: The Definitive Guide” , O’Reilley, 2011.
5. Alan Gates, “Programming Pig”, O’Reilley, 2011.
6. Jason Rutherglen, Dean Wampler and Edward Capriolo, “Programming
Hive” , O’Reilley, 2012.
Online Resources:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106104189
2. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/hadoop/index.htm
3. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/hive/index.htm
4. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/hbase/index.htm
5. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/apache_pig/index.htm
6. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/scala/index.htm
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will able to
1. Understands the basics of Big Data and its real time examples.
2. Describe the design of HDFS and Hadoop I/O.
3. Demonstrate the Hadoop architecture and implementation of MapReduce
application.
4. Understand Hadoop related database tools such as NoSQL, HBase and
Hive.
5. Design Pig Scripts for Big Data Applications.
6. Develop large scale applications using Apache Spark and Scala.204 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127DJ  3 0 0 3
DEEP LEARNING
(Professional Elective – 5)
Prerequisites: Probability and Statistics, Machine Learning
Course Objectives:
1. To understand the basic building blocks of artificial neural networks.
2. To acquire knowledge of supervised / unsupervised learning in neural
networks.
3. To understand the basics of deep learning and regularization for deep
learning.
4. Explore the methods to develop optimized deep learning networks
considering hyper parameters.
5. Model solutions for real-life problems using Convolution neural networks.
UNIT 1: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Neural Networks Introduction: History of Artificial Neural Networks,
Knowledge–Based Information Processing, Neural Information Processing,
Hybrid Intelligence.
Basic Neural Computational Models: Introduction, Basic Concepts of
Neural Networks, Inference and Learning, Classification Models, Association
Models, Optimization Models, Self-Organization Models, General Issues,
Hardware Implementation.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Deep Learning: Historical Trends in Deep Learning.
Deep Feed Forward Networks: Example: XOR, Gradient-based learning,
Hidden units, Architecture design, Back-Propagation and other differentiation
algorithms.
Regularization for Deep Learning: Parameter Norm Penalties, Norm
Penalties as Constrained Optimization, Regularization under constrained
problems, Dataset Augmentation, Noise Robustness, Semi-Supervised
Learning, Multi-Task Learning, Early Stopping, Parameter Tying and Sharing,
Sparse Representations, Bagging and Ensemble Methods, Dropout.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Optimization for Training Deep Models: How learning differs from Pure
Optimization, Challenges in Neural Network Optimization, Basic Algorithms,
Parameter Initialization Strategies, Algorithms with Adaptive Learning Rates,
Approximate second order methods, Optimization strategies and Meta-
algorithms.2022-2023 205
UNIT 4: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Convolutional Networks: The Convolution Operation, Motivation, Pooling,
Convolution and Pooling as an Infinitely Strong Prior, Variants of the Basic
Convolution Function, Structured Outputs, Data Types, Efficient Convolution
Algorithms, Random or Unsupervised Features, The Neuroscientific Basis
for Convolution Networks, Convolution neural networks and History of Deep
learning.
Types of CNN: LeNet, AlexNet, ResNet, VGG .
UNIT 5: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Application: Large-scale Deep learning, computer vision, speech recognition,
Natural Language Processing, other applications.
Text Books:
1. Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio and Aaron Courville, Deep Learning -
MIT Press book, 2016.
Reference Books:
1. Li Deng and Dong Yu, Deep Learning Methods and Applications,
Foundations and Trends® in Signal Processing, V olume 7, Issues 3-4,
ISSN: 1932-8346.
2. Dr. N.D. Lewis, Deep Learning Made Easy with R A Gentle Introduction
for Data Science, Create Space Independent Publishing Platform (January
10, 2016).
3. François Chollet, JJ Allaire, MEAP Edition Manning Early Access
Program Deep Learning with R Version 1, Copyright 2017 Manning
Publications.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.coursera.org/learn/neural-networks-deep-learning
2. https://www.deeplearning.ai/program/deep-learning-specialization/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the different types of neural networks for solving problems.
2. Apply neural network techniques for supervised and unsupervised
learning problems.
3. Understand and apply regularization for deep learning neural networks.
4. Use optimization techniques for training deep models.
5. Compare and analyze different architectures of Convolution neural
networks.
6. Use neural networks and deep learning techniques for solving real-world
problems.
k  k  k206 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127EW  3 0 0 3
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGIES
(Professional Elective – 5)
Prerequisites: Computer Networks
Course Objectives:
1. To enable students develop understanding on Blockchain Technology
2. To equip students with knowledge on cryptocurrencies working.
3. To empower students, gain knowledge on Blockchain implementation
technologies.
UNIT 1: (~ 6 Lecture Hours)
Blockchain 101: The History of Blockchain and Bitcoin, Types of Blockchain,
Consensus, CAP theorem and blockchain.
Decentralization: Decentralization using Blockchain, Methods of
decentralization, Routes to decentralization Blockchain and Full Ecosystem,
Smart contracts, Decentralized Organizations, Platforms for Decentralization.
UNIT 2: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Introducing Bitcoin: Bitcoin, Digital Keys and Addresses, Transactions,
Mining.
Bitcoin Network and Payments: Wallets, Bitcoin payments, Innovation in
Bitcoin Alternative Coins: – Theoretical Foundations, Bitcoin limitations,
Namecoin, Primecoin,
Zcash Smart Contracts: Ricardian Contracts.
UNIT 3: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Ethereum 101:  - The Ethereum network, Components of the Ethereum
ecosystem. Further Ethereum: - Programming Languages-Runtime Byte Code,
Blocks and Blockchain, Fee Schedule – Supporting Protocols. Development
Tools and Frameworks: - Solidity Language.
UNIT 4: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Introducing Web3:  - Web3 – Contract Deployment, POST Requests,
Development frameworks. Hyperledger: - Hyperledger as a protocol, The
reference architecture, Fabric-Hyperledger Fabric–Distributed Ledger,
Sawtooth Lake, Corda.
UNIT 5: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Alternative Blockchains: - Blockchains- Kadena, Ripple,Stellar, Rootstock,
Quorum, Tezos, Storj, Maidsafe, BigchainDB, Multichain, Tendermint,2022-2023 207
Platforms and Frameworks-Eris. Scalability and Other Challenges: -
Scalability, Privacy. Current Landscape and What’s Next: – Emerging
trends,Other Challenges, Blockchain Research, Notable Projects,
Miscellaneous Tools.
Text Book:
1. Imran Bashir, Mastering Blockchain: Distributed Ledger Technology,
Decentralization and Smart Contracts Explained, 2
nd Edition, Packt
Publishing, 2018.
Reference Books:
1. Arshdeep Bahga, Vijay Madisetti, Blockchain Applications: A Hands
On Approach, VPT, 2017.
2. Chandramouli Subramanian, Asha A George, Abilash KA
andMeenaKarthikeyan,Blockchain Technology, Universities Press, 2020.
3. Elad Elrom, The Blockchain Developer: A Practical Guide for Designing,
Implementing, Publishing, Testing and Securing Distributed Blockchain-
based projects, Springer Nature B.V , 2019.
Online Resources:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/105/106105184/
2. https://github.com/rddill-IBM/ZeroToBlockchain
3. tech.seas.harvard.edu/free-blockchain
4. https://www.codecademy.com/learn/introduction-toblockchain/
modules/fundamental- blockchain-concepts
5. The Basics of Blockchain & Bitcoin Fundamentals Course | Udemy
Course Outcomes:
After completion of this course, students will be able to
1. Acquire understanding on Blockchain Technology built-in way.
2. Interpret how various cryptocurrencies work.
3. Articulate Ethereum Blockchain for developing smart contracts.
4. Apprehend knowledge on Web3 and Hyperledger Fabric for decentralized
apps.
5. Exemplifying different alternative and emerging Blockchains.
6. Discover real-time usage of Blockchain.
k  k  k208 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12751 0 0 2 1
CRYPTOGRAPHY & NETWORK SECURITY LAB
Prerequisites: Computer Networks
Course objectives:
1. Understand various network security aspects.
2. Implement various cryptographic algorithms.
3. Implement authentication and digital signatures Algorithms.
List of programs:
Week 1:
Implement encryption and decryption using following techniques
a. Ceaser Cipher b. Playfair Cipher
Week 2:
Implement encryption and decryption using following techniques
a.  Hill Cipher b. Rail Fence, Row & Column Transformation.
Week 3:
Implement DES algorithm.
Week 4:
Implement AES algorithm.
Week 5:
Implement Cipher Block Modes of operation
a. Electronic Code Book  b. Cipher Block Chaining
Week 6:
Implement RC4 algorithm.
Week 7:
Implement RSA algorithm.
Week 8:
Implement the Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange mechanism.
Week 9:
Calculate the message digest of a text using the SHA-512 algorithm.
Week 10:
Write a program in java, which performs a Digital Signature on a given text.2022-2023 209
Week 11:
Study of the features of firewall in providing network security and to set
Firewall Security in windows.
Week 12:
Steps to ensure Security of any one web browser (Mozilla Firefox/Google
Chrome)
Week 13:
Study of different types of vulnerabilities for hacking a websites / Web
Applications.
Week 14:
Analysis of the security vulnerabilities on E-Mail Application.
Text Books:
1. William Stallings, Cryptography and Network Security, 7 th Edition, 2017
Pearson Education.
Reference books:
1. Behrouz A.Forouzan and Debdeep Mukhopadhyay, Cryptography and
Network Security, 3rd Edition, 2015 McGraw Hill Education.
2. Michael Gregg, Build your own Security Lab, Wiley India.
Online resources:
1. https://www.cybrary.it/catalog
2. http://cse.iitd.ernet.in/~murali/crypt
3. https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/block-cipher-techniques
4. https://www.udemy.com/build-your-own-cyber-lab-at-home
5. https://www.cyderaces.org/tutorials
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Design & Develop various Substitution and Transposition Techniques.
2. Implement Cryptographic Algorithms.
3. Analyze and implement Authentication Techniques.
4. Understand and implement Key Exchange Techniques.
5. Demonstration of various security tools.
6. Analyze different security issues and vulnerabilities on various
applications.
k  k  k210 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12753  0 0 2 1
DATA SCIENCE USING R LAB
(Professional Elective-4)
Prerequisites: Database Management Systems
Course Objectives:
1. Understand the R Programming Language.
2. Exposure on Solving of Data Science Problems.
3. Understand the classification Model.
4. Understand the Regression Model.
5. Able to Understand Statistics usage in data Science.
Week 1-2:
Calculator Application:
a) Using with and without R objects on console.
b) Using mathematical functions on console.
c) Write an R script, to create R objects for calculator application and save
in a specified location in disk.
d) R Packages: tidyr, ggplot2, ggraph, glue. shiny.
Week 3:
Descriptive Statistics:
a) Write an R script to find basic descriptive statistics using summary.
b) Write an R script to find subset of dataset by using subset.
Week 4:
Reading and Writing Different Types of Datasets:
a) Reading different types of data sets (.txt, .csv) from web and disk and
writing in file in specific disk location.
b) Reading Excel data sheet in R.
c) Reading XML dataset in R.
Week 5-6:
Visualizations:
a) Find the data distributions using box and scatter plot.
b) Find the outliers using plot.
c) Plot the histogram, bar chart and pie chart on sample data2022-2023 211
Week 7:
Correlation and Covariance:
a) Develop a program to find the correlation matrix on iris data.
b) Plot the correlation plot on dataset and visualize giving an overview of
relationships among data on iris data
c) Analysis of covariance: variance (ANOV A), if data have categorical
variables on iris data.
Week 8:
Regression Model:
a) Import a data from web storage. Name the dataset and now do Logistic
Regression to find out relation between variables that are affecting the
admission of a student in an institute based on his or her GRE score,
GPA obtained and rank of the student. Also check the model is fit or not.
Require (foreign), require (MASS).
b) Apply regression Model to predict the data on any dataset.
Week 9:
Multiple Regression Model:
a) Develop Multiple Regression model for any dataset.
b) Apply Multiple Regression Model to predict the data on any dataset.
Week 10:
Classification Model:
a) Install relevant package for classification.
b) Implement and evaluate the performance of various classifiers with
different datasets.
Week 11:
Clustering Model:
a) Clustering algorithms for unsupervised classification.
b) Plot the cluster data using R visualizations.
Week 12:
Time Series Model:
a) Plot the Time series data using R visualizations.
b) Time series Forecasting using Exponential smoothing, ARIMA models.
Text Books:
1. Yanchang Zhao, R and Data Mining: Examples and Case Studies, Elsevier,
1
st Edition, 2012.
2. Nina Zumel and John Mount, Practical Data Science with R, 2 nd Edition,
Manning Publications.212 Computer Science and Engineering
Reference Books:
1. Jure Leskovek, Anand Rajaraman and Jeffrey Ullman, Mining of Massive
Datasets, v2.1, Cambridge University Press.
2. Foster Provost and Tom Fawcett, Data Science for Business, What You
Need to Know about Data Mining and Data-Analytic Thinking, O Reilly.
Online Resources:
1. http://datasciencemasters.org/.
2. http://learnds.com/
3. https://www.datascienceweekly.org/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand and apply suitable functions in R for data science.
2. Apply various descriptive statistics on real world problems.
3. Design suitable models to extract useful information for the given data
sets.
4. Apply various visualization methods on real world problems.
5. Design classification, regression models to perform analysis on given
datasets.
6. Analyze various clustering techniques for better understanding.
k  k  k2022-2023 213
IV Year B.Tech CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12757  00 2 1
INTERNET OF THINGS AND APPLICATIONS LAB
(Common to CSE, CSE(Data Science) & CSE(AI & ML))
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To impart necessary and practical knowledge of components of Internet
of Things.
2. To introduce the Python Scripting Language which is used in many IoT
devices.
3. To introduce the Raspberry Pi platform, that is widely used in IoT
applications.
4. Develop the required skills to build real-life IoT based projects.
List of Experiments:
Install the following on the local machine -
l Raspberry Pi OS
l Python
Implement and test the following experiments on a Raspberry Pi.
Week 1:
Familiarization of the equipment used for IoT lab with necessary software
installation.
Week 2:
a. Start Raspberry Pi and try various Linux commands in command terminal
window: ls, cd, touch, mv, rm, man, mkdir, rmdir, tar, gzip, cat, more,
less, ps, sudo, cron, chown, chgrp, ping.
b. Study of Connectivity and Configuration of Raspberry-Pi/Beagle Board
circuit with basic peripherals, LEDs, Understanding GPIO and its use in
program.
Week 3:
a. Program to Read your name and print Hello message with name.
b. Program to Read two numbers and print their sum, difference, product
and division.
Week 4:
Program to display Word and character count of a given string.214 Computer Science and Engineering
Week 5:
Program to print a name ‘n’ times, where name and n are read from standard
input, using for and while loops.
Week 6:
Program to print current time for 10 times with an interval of 10 seconds.
Read a file line by line and print the word count of each line.
Week 7:
Light an LED through Python program.
Week 8:
Program to get input from two switches and switch on corresponding LEDs.
Week 9:
Program to Flash an LED at a given on time and off time cycle, where the
two times are taken from a file.
Week 10:
Program to Flash an LED based on cron output (acts as an alarm).
Week 11:
Program to switch on a relay at a given time using cron, where the relay’s
contact terminals are connected to a load.
Week 12:
Build a cloud-ready temperature sensor with the Raspberry Pi and any IoT
Platform. (Use any freely available cloud platform to perform this program)
Suggested Case Studies/Industrial Applications:
1. Develop an IoT based web-controlled Home Automation using
Raspberry Pi.
2. Build an application that has three LEDs (Red, Green and white). The
LEDs should follow the cycle (All Off, Red On, Green On, White On)
for each clap (use sound sensor).
Text Books:
1. Vijay Madisetti and Arshdeep Bahga, Internet of Things- A Hands on
Approach, University Press.
2. Dr. SRN Reddy, Rachit Thukral and Manasi Mishra, Introduction to
Internet of Things: A practical Approach, ETI Labs.2022-2023 215
Reference Books:
1. Pethuru Raj and Anupama C. Raman, The Internet of Things: Enabling
Technologies, platforms, and Use Cases, CRC Press.
2. Jeeva Jose, Internet of Things, Khanna Publishing House, Delhi.
Online Resources:
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc22_cs53/preview
2. https://www.coursera.org/courses?query=iot
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand Internet of Things and its hardware and software components.
2. Identify the sensors and interfaces for I/O devices.
3. Create programs using python programming language.
4. Interface IoT communication modules.
5. Remotely monitor data in Cloud.
6. Develop real life IoT based projects.
k  k  k216 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech. CSE I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 12754 0 0 2 1
DEVOPS LAB
(Professional Elective – 4)
(Common to CSE, CSE (Data Science), CSE (AI & ML), CST & IT)
Prerequisites: Object Oriented Programming through JA V A, Full Stack
Development.
Course Objectives:
1. Describe the agile relationship between development and IT operations.
2. Understand the skill sets and high-functioning teams involved in DevOps
and related methods to reach a continuous delivery capability
3. Implement automated system update and DevOps lifecycle.
List of Experiments:
Week 1:
Write code for a simple user registration form for an event.
Week 2:
Explore Git and GitHub commands.
Week 3:
Practice Source code management on GitHub. Experiment with the source
code written in exercise 1.
Week 4:
Jenkins installation and setup, explore the environment.
Week 5:
Demonstrate continuous integration and development using Jenkins.
Week 6:
Explore Docker commands for content management.
Week 7:
Develop a simple containerized application using Docker.
Week 8:
Integrate Kubernetes and Docker.
Week 9:
Automate the process of running containerized application developed in
exercise 7 using Kubernetes.2022-2023 217
Week 10:
Install and Explore Selenium for automated testing.
Week 11:
Write a simple program in JavaScript and perform testing using Selenium.
Week 12:
Develop test cases for the above containerized application using selenium.
Text Books:
1. Joakim Verona. Practical Devops, Second Edition. Ingram short title, 2 nd
edition (2018). ISBN-10: 1788392574.
2. Deepak Gaikwad and Viral Thakkar,  DevOps Tools from Practitioner’s
Viewpoint. Wiley publications. ISBN: 9788126579952
Reference Books:
1. Len Bass, Ingo Weber, Liming Zhu. DevOps: A Software Architect’s
Perspective. Addison Wesley
2. Edureka DevOps Full Course - https://youtu.be/S_0q75eD8Yc
Online Resources:
1. https://youtu.be/S_0q75eD8Yc
2. https://aws.amazon.com/training/
3. https://www.pluralsight.com/paths/devops
4. https://www.udemy.com/course/devops-bootcamp/
5. https://www.katacoda.com/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Identify components of Devops environment
2. Apply different project management, integration, testing and code
deployment tool
3. Investigate different DevOps Software development, models
4. Demonstrate continuous integration and development using Jenkins
5. Develop a simple application using kubernetes and docker
6. Evaluate the effectiveness of test cases for the containerized application
using selenium
k  k  k218 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 128GW  2 0 0 2
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT
(Common to CSE, CSD, CSM, CST, ECE, EEE, ETE & IT)
Prerequisites: Fundamentals of Management
Course Objectives:
1. Inculcate the entrepreneurial knowledge required to start and/or to run a
business.
2. Hone entrepreneurial skills and create sensibility in entrepreneurial
establishment.
3. Develop strategic skills in the project planning and implementation.
UNIT 1: (~05 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurship: Introduction to Entrepreneur - Characteristic and skills
of an Entrepreneur – Functions and Types of Entrepreneurs – Theories of
Entrepreneurship -  Process of Entrepreneurship - Factors affecting
Entrepreneurship development - Women Entrepreneurs - Growth and
Problems – Importance of Entrepreneurial Marketing.
UNIT 2: (~ Lecture Hours)
Entrepreneurial business selection
Entrepreneurial business selection: Criteria for selection of Business
Structure - Types of Business Structures - Sole Proprietorship – Partnership
- Limited Liability Partnership(LLP) - One-person company - Joint stock
company – Features - Merits & Demerits – Suitability.
UNIT 3: (~07 lectures)
Project Finance for Entrepreneur: Introduction to Capital-Types of Capital-
Factors affecting Fixed Capital and Working Capital requirements -Sources
of raising Finance – Entrepreneurial Finance (Seed Funding, Business Angels,
Venture Capital, Family Offices, Financial bootstrapping, Buyouts,
Accelerators and Incubators, Crowdfunding, IP based Investment funds).
UNIT 4: (~07  Lecture Hours)
Project Appraisal/Evaluation Techniques
Capital Budgeting: Introduction - Need and Importance of Capital Budgeting
-Traditional methods - Payback Period Method - ARR Method. Discounted
Cash Flow Method – NPV - PI and IRR (simple problems).
Network Analysis  - Introduction to Network analysis – PERT & CPM
Analysis. Identification of Critical Path - Probability of Completing the Project
within a given time - Calculation of Float/Slack - Importance of PERT &
CPM in Decision Making – Project audit.2022-2023 219
UNIT 5: (07  Lecture Hours)
Entrepreneurial Business Plan:
Entrepreneurial Business Plan - Preparation – Aspects to be considered in
preparing Business Plan – Objectives – Elements of Business Plan (Production
plan and Operational Plan)- Understanding Risk assessment of Enterprise
towards Entrepreneurial Success. India-  Case Study.
Text Books:
1. Dr. S.S. Khanka (2021) Entrepreneurial Development, 4
th Edition,
S.Chand & Company.
2. L. S. Srinath (2012) PERT & CPM – Principles & Applications, 3 rd
Edition, EWP.
Reference Books:
1. Khan & Jain (2018) Financial Management, 8 th Edition, TMH.
2. Robert.D.Hisrich, Mathew. J. Manimala, Michael. P. Peter, Dean
A.Shepherd (2017) Entrepreneurship, 9 th Edition, Mc. Graw Hill.
3. S. D. Sharma (2008) Operations Research, 15 th Edition, Macmillan.
4. Tulsian (2002) Business organization & Management, 1 st Edition,
Pearson.
Online Resources:
1. Entrepreneurship Essentials https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/
noc21_ge06/preview
2. Project Management  https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc21_mg71/
preview
3. Financial Management for Managers https://nptel.ac.in/courses/
110107144
Course Outcomes:
After learning the contents of this course, the student must be able to
1. Summarize the entrepreneurial ingenuity and skills required for business
functioning.
2. Relate the probable business structures for entrepreneurial decisions.
3. Identify the probable finance alternatives available for investment in the
project.
4. Deduct the investment opportunities and resource allocation decisions.
5. Evaluate the time feasibility of entrepreneurial project implementation.
6. Integrate and formulate an entrepreneurial business plan.
k  k  k220 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 128CR  3 0 0 3
HUMAN COMPUTER INTERACTION
(Professional Elective-6)
(Common to CSE & IT)
Prerequisites: Full Stack Development
Course Objectives:
1. To learn the principles and fundamentals of Human computer interaction.
2. To understand contemporary theories developed for accounting HCI
issues which include user behavior, cognitive, affective, interpersonal
and social aspects in interaction design.
3. To acquire the skill to isolate the features of an existing interface design
with flaws and improve them.
UNIT 1: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: Importance of user Interface – definition, importance of good
design. Benefits of good design. A brief history of Screen design.
The graphical user interface – popularity of graphics, the concept of direct
manipulation, graphical system, Characteristics, Web user – Interface
popularity, characteristics- Principles of user interface.
UNIT 2: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Design process – Understanding How people interact with computers,
Important Human characteristics in design, Human considerations in design,
Human interaction speeds and understanding Business functions.
UNIT 3: (~12 Lecture Hours)
Screen Designing: Interface design goals – Screen meaning and purpose,
organizing screen elements, ordering of screen data and content – screen
navigation and flow – Visually pleasing composition – amount of information
– focus and emphasis – statistical graphics ,Types of statistical graphics.
Technological consideration in interface design: Graphical systems, Web
systems, Examples of Screens.
UNIT 4: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Windows -Menus and Navigation schemes, select the proper kinds of
windows, select the proper device base controls and choose the proper Screen
Based controls.
Components- text and messages, Icons and Multimedia, colors - uses,
problems, choosing colors.2022-2023 221
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Cognitive Models-Introduction, Goal and task hierarchies, Linguistic models,
challenge of display based system, Physical and device models and cognitive
architectures.
Interaction Devices – Keyboard and function keys – pointing devices –
speech recognition digitization and generation – image and video displays-
drivers.
Text Books:
1. Wilbert O Galitz, The essential guide to user interface design, Wiley
DreamaTech.
2. Ben Shneidermann, Designing the user interface, 3 rd Edition, Pearson
Education Asia.
Reference Books:
1. Alan Dix, Janet Fincay, Gre Goryd, Abowd and Russell Bealg, Human
- Computer Interaction. Pearson Education.
2. Prece, Rogers and Sharps, Interaction Design, Wiley Dreamtech.
3. Soren Lauesen, User Interface Design, Pearson Education.
Online Resources:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106103115
2. https://www.coursera.org/learn/human-computer-interaction
3. https://medium.com/ux-for-india/list-of-courses-for-ux-hci-or-id-
aspirants-7f65770b33de
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the importance of good screen design and gain knowledge
of various graphical user interface concepts.
2. Implement user interface design by using various interface paradigms.
3. Adapt graphical systems and extend the classic screen design standards
and guidelines.
4. Apply appropriate screen components for building interactive prototypes.
5. Analyze human cognitive and sensory system and the limitations of
human performance in HCI.
6. Compare different human computer interaction methods to meet the needs
of practical software development process.
k  k  k222 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 128GR  3 0 0 3
CYBER FORENSICS
(Professional Elective-6)
Prerequisites: - Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To understand the fundamentals of Computer Crimes, Ethical Hacking
Digital forensics and the role digital evidences.
2. To understand the process of incident response and handling procedure
of evidences.
3. To interpret various data collection, data duplication methods and tools
4. To understand different attacks and investigation techniques in Network,
E-mail, Mobile and Cloud environments.
5. To describe the role and use of current forensic tools.
UNIT 1: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Computer Crimes and Ethical Hacking:
Introduction to Computer Crime, Categories of Cyber Crimes, Types of Cyber
Crimes, The Internet Spawns Crime, Worms versus Viruses, Computer’s Role
in Crimes, Cyber Crimes Statistics in India, Prevention of Cyber Crime.
Ethical Hacking: Definitions, Difference between Hacking and Ethical
Hacking, Steps of Ethical hacking, exploring some Tools for Ethical hacking,
What to Do if been Hacked.
Digital forensics: Introduction, Need & Rules of Computer/ Digital forensic,
Types of Digital forensics, Ethical issues, Digital forensic investigations, Goal
of digital forensic investigation.
UNIT 2: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Digital evidences: Introduction, rules of digital evidence, characteristics of
digital evidence, types of evidence, challenges in evidence handling.
Incidence Response: Introduction, Goals of incident response, people
involved in incident response, incident response process and Methodology,
Activities in initial response, Phases after detection of an incident.
Data Collection: Introduction, the facts in a criminal case, people involved
in data collection techniques,Live data collection, Live data collection
examples-Windows, Unix.
UNIT 3: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Forensic Duplication: - Introduction, Rules of forensic duplication (Thumb
Rule), Necessity of forensic duplication, Forensic duplicates as admissible2022-2023 223
evidence, Important terms in forensic duplicate, Forensic Image formats,
Traditional Duplication, Live system duplication, Forensic duplication Tool
requirements, Creating a Forensic duplicate of a Hard Drive, Creating a
Qualified Forensic duplicate of a hard Drive.
Network Forensics: Introduction to IDS (Intrusion Detection System), Types
of IDS, Advantages and disadvantages, Understanding Network intrusions
and Attacks, recognizing pre-intrusion/ Attack activities, Port Scans, Address
Spoofing, Attacking with Trojans, Viruses and Worms, Understanding
Password cracking, Understanding Technical Exploits, Collecting Network
based evidence, Investigating routers, Network Protocols.
UNIT 4: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
E-Mail Forensics: Importance of E-Mail as evidence, Working of E-Mail,
Steps in E-mail communication, E-mail service protocols, E-Mail forensic
analysis steps, E- Mail Forensic Tools.
Mobile Forensics: Mobile hacking- SMS and Call Forging, mobile phone
forensics, Forensic procedures, CIA Traid, Software and hardware mobile
phone tricks, Android forensics, Mobileforensic Tools.
UNIT 5: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Cloud Forensics: Introduction, Three dimensions of cloud forensics, usage
of cloud forensic, challenges to cloud forensic.Impact of cloud computing
on digital forensic, Cloud forensic Tools.
Computer Forensic Tools: Introduction, evaluating computer forensic tool
needs, types of computer forensic tools, tasks performed by computer forensic
tools, Tool comparisions, software tools, hardware tools, Various computer/
Digital forensic tools.
Text Books:
1. Dr. Neelakshi jain & Dr. Dhanajay R. Kalbande, Digital Forensic: The
Fascinating World of Digital Evidences, Wiley Publications, 2017.
2. Nelson, Phillips Enfinger, Steuart, Computer Forensics and Investigations,
CENGAGE Learning.
Reference Books:
1. John R. Vacca, Computer Forensics, Computer Crime Investigation,
Firewall Media, New Delhi.
2. Kevin Mandia, Chris Prosise, “Incident Response and computer
forensics”, Tata McGraw Hill, 2006.224 Computer Science and Engineering
Online Resources:
1. https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/digital-forensics-with/
9781597495868/
2. https://onlinecourses.swayam2.ac.in/cec20_lb06/preview
3. https://www.mooc-list.com/course/digital-forensics-concepts-course
4. https://www.classcentral.com/course/edx-computer-forensics-7857
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the fundamental concepts of forensics, digital evidence,
ethical hacking and the incident response process.
2. Apply various data acquisition techniques and tools on the evidences.
3. Learn the methods applicable for different forensic investigations.
4. Usage of various forensic tools to analyze different forensics data.
5. Gains knowledge on cloud forensic procedures and challenges.
6. Apply problem solving skills to detect current attacks on an organization’s
computer systems and Networks.
k  k  k2022-2023 225
IV Year B.Tech CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 128GM  3 0 0 3
AD-HOC AND SENSOR NETWORKS
(Professional Elective – 6)
Prerequisites: - Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Understand the design issues in ad hoc and sensor networks.
2. Be familiar with different types of adhoc routing protocols.
3. Exposed to the TCP issues in adhoc networks.
4. Learn the architecture and protocols of wireless sensor networks.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Characteristics of MANETS,
Applications of MANETS, Challenges.
Routing in Ad hoc Networks: Topology based versus position based
approaches, Topology based routing protocols, and position based routing,
other routing protocols.
UNIT 2: (~12 Lecture Hours)
Data Transmission in MANETS: The broadcast storm, Multicasting,
Geocasting.
TCP Over Ad Hoc Networks: TCP protocol overview, TCP and MANETS,
Solutions for TCP over Ad Hoc.
UNIT 3: (~12 Lecture Hours)
Basics of Wireless Sensors and Applications: Introduction, Empirical
Energy Consumption, Sensing and Communication Range, Design Issues,
Clustering of Sensors.
Data Retrieval In Sensor Networks: Classification of WSNs, Routing Layer:
Flat Based Routing - Directed diffusion(DD),Sequential Assignment
Routing(SAR),Minimum Cost Forwarding Algorithm(MCFA), Hierarchical
Routing: Cluster Based Routing Protocol(CBRP), Adaptive Routing : Low
energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy(LEACH), Threshold sensitive Energy
Efficient(TEEN), Adaptive Periodic TEEN(APTEEN), SPIN based Adaptive
Routing, Power Efficient Gathering in Sensor Information Systems
(PEGASIS), High-Level Application Layer Support.
UNIT 4: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
MAC Protocols for wireless sensor networks – Low duty cycle protocols
and wakeup concepts – Contention- Based protocols – Schedule-Based
protocols – IEEE 802.15.4 Zigbee – Topology control Routing protocols.226 Computer Science and Engineering
Security: Security in Ad Hoc Wireless Networks, Key Management, Secure
Routing, Cooperation in MANETs, Intrusion Detection Systems.
UNIT 5: (~ 6 Lecture Hours)
Sensor Network Platforms and Tools: Sensor Network Hardware.Sensor
Network Programming Challenges and Node-Level Software Platforms.
Operating System-Tiny OS: Imperative Language: nesC, Data flow style
language: TinyGALS, Node- Level Simulators, NS-2 and its sensors network
extension, TOSSIM.
Text Books:
1. Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks: Theory and Applications, Carlos de Morais
Cordeiro and Dharma Prakash Agrawal, World Scientific Publications /
Cambridge University Press,2006.
2. Wireless Sensor Networks: Information Processing Approach, Feng Zhao,
Leonidas Guibas, Elsevier Science Imprint, Morgan Kauffman Publishers,
2005.
Reference Books:
1. Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Architectures and Protocols, C. Siva Ram
Murthy and B. S. Manoj, Pearson Education, 2004.
2. Guide to Wireless Ad Hoc Networks, Sudip Misra, Isaac Woungang, and
Subhas Chandra Misra, Springer International Edition, 2011.
3. Guide to Wireless Sensor Networks, Sudip Misra, Isaac Woungang, and
Subhas Chandra Misra, Springer International Edition, 2012.
Online Resources:
1. Wireless Adhoc And Sensor Networks - Course (nptel.ac.in)
2. Wireless Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks | (iitk.ac.in)
3. Advanced Network Technologies Virtual Lab — IIT Kharagpur
(iitkgp.ac.in)
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the concepts, network architectures and applications of ad
hoc and wireless sensor networks.
2. Analyze the protocol design issues of ad hoc and sensor networks
3. Design routing protocols for ad hoc and wireless sensor networks with
respect to some protocol design issues.
4. Evaluate the QoS related performance measurements of ad hoc and sensor
networks.
5. Differentiate the different operating Systems for various mobile and sensor
networks.
6. Understand the various tools for simulating Adhoc and sensor networks.2022-2023 227
IV Year B.Tech CSE II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 128HE  3 0 0 3
QUANTUM COMPUTING
(Common to CSE & CSE(AI&ML))
Prerequisites: Data Structures and algorithms, Digital logic design
Course Objectives:
1. Introduce the mathematical foundation of quantum computing.
2. Understand the fundamentals of quantum computing.
3. Explain quantum decoherence in systems for computation.
4. Understand the concepts of Topological Quantum Computing, Quantum
Essentials.
5. Implement basic quantum algorithms.
6. To learn programming using Q# for quantum algorithms.
UNIT 1: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Essential Linear Algebra: Some Basic Algebra, Matrix
Math, Vectors and Vector Spaces, Set Theory.
Complex Numbers: Definition of Complex Numbers, Algebra of Complex
Numbers, Complex Numbers Graphically, Vector Representations of Complex
Numbers, Pauli Matrices, Transcendental Numbers.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Basic Physics for Quantum Computing: The Journey to Quantum, Quantum
Physics Essentials, Basic Atomic Structure, Hilbert Spaces, Uncertainty,
Quantum States, Entanglement. Basic Quantum Theory: Further with
Quantum Mechanics, Quantum Decoherence, Quantum Electrodynamics,
Quantum Chromodynamics, Feynman Diagram, Quantum Entanglement and
QKD (Quantum Entanglement, QKE).
UNIT 3: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Quantum Architecture: Further with Qubits, Logic gates, applications of
logic gates, Quantum Gates, More with Gates, Quantum Circuits, The
D-Wave Quantum Architecture, SQUID Quantum Hardware: Qubits, How
Many Qubits Are Needed? Addressing Decoherence (Supercooling, Dealing
with Noise, Filtering Noise), Topological Quantum Computing, Quantum
Essentials.
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Quantum Algorithms: Deutsch’s Algorithm, Deutsch-Jozsa Algorithm,
Bernstein-Vazirani Algorithm, Simon’s Algorithm, Shor’s Algorithm, The
Quantum Period-Finding Function, Grover’s Algorithm.228 Computer Science and Engineering
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Quantum Programming: Working with Q#: Basic Programming Concepts
(Variables and Statements, Control Structures). Getting Started with Q#:
Installation and simple project creation.
Implementation of algorithms using Q#: Grover’s Algorithm, Deutsch-
Jozsa Algorithm, Bit Flipping.
Text Books:
1. Dr.Chuck Easttom, Quantum Computing Fundamentals, Pearson.
2. Nielsen M.A. Quantum Computation and Quantum Information,
Cambridge University Press.
Reference Books:
1. Nason S. Yanofsky and Mirco A. Mannucci, Quantum Computing for
Computer Scientists.
2. Benenti G., Casati G . and Strini G ., Principles of Quantum Computation
and Information, V ol. Basic Concepts. V ol. Basic Tools and Special
Topics, World Scientific.
3. Pittenger A. 0, An Introduction to Quantum Computing Algorithms.
Online Resources:
1. IBM Experience
2. https://quantumexperience.ng.bluemix.net
3. Microsoft Quantum Development kit
4. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/quantum/development-kit
5. Programming with Q#
6. https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/quantum/overview-what-is-
qsharp-and-qdk
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Solve the problems related to Matrix algebra, Complex numbers and
Pauli matrices.
2. Use fundamental concept of quantum computing and Quantum
Entanglement.
3. Interpret the dynamics involved in quantum computing.
4. Understand Quantum architecture, and address decoherence.
5. Apply various quantum algorithms in real time applications.
6. Implement Quantum programming using Q#.
k  k  k2022-2023 229
III Year B.Tech. II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126KF  3 0 0 3
FUNDAMENTALS OF DATA STRUCTURES
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Understand the notations used to analyze the performance of algorithms.
2. Understand the basic concepts such as Linear and Nonlinear Data
structures.
3. Understand the behavior of data structures such as stacks, queues, trees,
search trees, graphs and their representations.
4. Choose the appropriate data structure for a specified application.
5. Understand and analyze various searching and sorting algorithms.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Basic concepts- Algorithm Specification, Performance Analysis - Time
Complexity and Space Complexity, Asymptotic Notation-Big O, Omega and
Theta notations, Introduction to Linear and Non Linear data structures. Stacks,
Queues, Circular queues, Applications of stacks: infix to postfix conversion,
postfix expression evaluation.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Linked list: Singly Linked List, Doubly Linked List, Circular linked list
working and representation. Implementation of stacks and queues using linked
list.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Trees: Introduction, Basic terminology, Binary Trees, Sequential and Linked
representation, Operations - insertion, deletion and traversal.
Hashing: Introduction, Hash Functions, Collision Resolution Techniques.
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Searching: Linear and binary Search methods.
Sorting: Bubble Sort, Selection Sort, Insertion Sort, Quick sort, Merge sort,
Heap sort, Time complexities.
UNIT 5: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Graphs: Terminology, Properties, Graph representations – Adjacency matrix,
Adjacency list. Graph Traversals: Depth First Search & Breadth First Search
Search Trees: Binary Search Trees, Definition, Operations - Insertion and
Deletion, m-way search trees (Definition only).230 Computer Science and Engineering
Text Books:
1. R.Thareja, Data Structures using C, Oxford University Press, October
2015.
2. Horowitz, Sahni, and Anderson - Freed, Fundamentals of Data Structures
in C, 2nd Edition, Universities Press.
Reference Books:
1. R.F.Gilberg and B.A.Forouzan, Data Structures: A Pseudocode Approach
with C, 2nd Edition, Cengage Learning.
2. A.M.Tanenbaum, Y .Langsam and M.J. Augenstein, Data Structures using
C, 2004, Pearson Education Asia.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.cise.ufl.edu/~sahni/fdsc2ed/instruct/index.html
2. www.geeksforgeeks.org/data-structures
3. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106102064
4. https://www.coursera.org/learn/data-structures
5. https://ict.iitk.ac.in/wp-content/uploads/CS210-Data-Structures-Module-
1-Motivation.pdf
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the time and space complexities of algorithms.
2. Differentiate between linear and non-linear data structures.
3. Use basic data structures such as linked list, stack and queue for data
representation.
4. Understand non linear data structures like binary trees, search trees and
graphs.
5. Choose appropriate data structures as applied to specified problem
definition.
6. Analyze Various Kinds of Searching and Sorting Techniques.
k  k  k2022-2023 231
III Year B. Tech. II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126KG  3 0 0 3
FUNDAMENTALS OF DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Understand the basic concepts and the applications of database systems.
2. Understand the relational database design principles.
3. Master the basics of SQL and construct queries using SQL.
4. Understand the design databases using data modelling and data
normalization techniques.
UNIT 1: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: History of database system , Database-system applications,
Purpose of database systems, View of data, Database languages, Relational
databases, Data storage and querying, Transaction management, Database
architecture, Database users and administrators.
UNIT 2: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Database Design and E-R Model: The Entity-Relationship model,
Constrains, Removing Redundant Attributes in Entity Sets, Entity-
Relationship Diagrams, Reduction to Relational Schemas, Entity- Relationship
Design issues, Extended E-R Features.
Introduction to Relational Model : Structure of Relational Databases,
Database Schema, Schema Diagrams, Relational Query Languages, Relational
Operations.
UNIT 3: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Relational Query Languages: The Relational Algebra, Tuple Relational
Calculus, Domain Relational Calculus.
Introduction to SQL: Overview of the SQL Query Language, SQL Data
Definition, Basic Structure of SQL Queries, Additional Basic Operations,
Set Operations, Null Values, Aggregate Functions, Nested Sub Queries,
Modification of the Database.
UNIT 4: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Advanced SQL: Join Expressions, Views, Integrity Constraints, Accessing
SQL from a Programming Language, Functions and procedures, Triggers.232 Computer Science and Engineering
UNIT 5: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Relational Database Design: Features of Good Relational Designs, Atomic
Domains and First Normal Form, Decomposition Using Functional
Dependencies, Functional Dependency Theory, Algorithms for
Decompositions, Decomposition using Multi Valued Dependencies, More
Normal Forms.
Text Books:
1. A. Silberschatz, Henry.F. Korth and S. Sudharshan, Database System
Concepts, 6
th Edition, Mc Graw Hill Education (India) Private Limited.
Reference Books:
1. C.J. Date, A.Kannan, and S.Swami Nadhan, An Introduction to Database
systems, 8th Edition, Pearson Education.
2. Raghu Ramakrishnan and Johannes Gehrke, Database Management
Systems, 3rd Edition, Mc Graw Hill Education (India) Private Limited.
3. R Elmasri and Shamkant B. Navathe, Database Systems, 6 th Edition,
Pearson Education.
Online Resources:
1. www.w3schools.in
2. https://beginnersbook.com/2015/04/dbms-tutorial/
3. https://www.coursera.org/courses?query=database
4. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cs15
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand concepts and the applications of database systems and
implement in real time applications.
2. Design an Entity-Relationship (E-R) model from specifications and
transform to relational model.
3. Demonstrate the basic concepts of relational database management
system.
4. Construct unary/binary/set/aggregate queries in Relational Algebra and
in SQL.
5. Articulate the SQL commands for retrieval and management of data.
6. Apply normalization on database schema.
k  k  k2022-2023 233
III Year B. Tech. II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126KK  3 0 0 3
OPERATING SYSTEMS
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Interpret the role of an Operating System in the overall computer system
and study the operations performed by it as a resource manager.
2. Understand the scheduling policies and different memory management
techniques for different Operating Systems.
3. Examine process concurrency, synchronization and deadlock situation.
4. Assess the concepts of I/O, storage and file management and introduce
system call interface for file and process management.
5. Outline the goals and principles of protection.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: Overview-Introduction-Operating System objectives and
functions, User view, System view, Operating System definition, Evolution
of Operating System- Simple Batch systems, Multiprogrammed, Time Sharing
Systems, OS Operations, Process Management, Memory Management,
Storage Management, Protection and Security, Computing Environments.
Operating System services, User and OS Interface, System Calls, Types of
System Calls, System Programs, Operating System Design and
Implementation, OS Structure.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Process: Process concepts-The Process, Process State, Process State
transitions, Process Control Block, Context Switch. Threads: Definition,
Various states, Benefits of threads, Types of threads, Concept of multithreads.
Process Scheduling: Scheduling Queues, Schedulers, Scheduling Criteria,
Scheduling algorithms, Multiprocessor Scheduling. Case Studies: Linux,
Windows.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Process Synchronization: Inter-process Communication - Background, The
Critical Section Problem, Race Conditions, Mutual Exclusion, Peterson’s
solution, Synchronization Hardware, Semaphores, Classic Problems of
Synchronization - Bounded Buffer Problem, The Producer/ Consumer
Problem, Reader’s & Writer’s Problem, Dinning Philosopher Problem, Event
counters, Monitors, Message passing.234 Computer Science and Engineering
Deadlocks: Deadlocks - System Model, Deadlock Characterization -
Necessary and sufficient conditions for Deadlock, Methods for Handling
Deadlocks - Deadlock Prevention, Deadlock Avoidance, Deadlock Detection
and Recovery from Deadlock.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Memory Management: Basic Hardware, Address Binding, Logical and
physical address space, Dynamic loading, linking and shared libraries,
Swapping, Contiguous Memory Allocation- Fixed and variable partition -
Internal and External fragmentation and Compaction, Segmentation, Paging-
Hardware support for paging, Protection, shared pages, Structure of Page
Table, Case Studies - Linux, Windows.
Virtual Memory Management: Background, Demand Paging-locality of
reference, Page fault, Copy- on-Write, Page replacement, Page Replacement
Algorithms, Allocation of Frames, Thrashing.
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
File Management: Concept of File - Attributes, operations, file types, internal
structure, access methods, Directory structure, file protection, file system
structure, Allocation methods (contiguous, linked, indexed), Freespace
management (bit vector, linked list, grouping), directory implementation
(linear list, hash table), efficiency and performance.
Disk Management: Disk structure, Disk scheduling - FCFS, SSTF, SCAN,
C-SCAN, Disk formatting- Bootblock, Bad blocks.
Protection: System Protection, Goals of Protection, Principles of Protection.
Text Books:
1. Abraham Silberschatz, Peter B.Galvin and Greg Gagne, Operating System
Concepts, 9
th Edition, Wiley AsiaStudent Edition.
2. William Stallings, Operating Systems: Internals and Design Principles,
5th Edition, Prentice Hall of India.
Reference Books:
1. Charles Crowley, Operating System: A Design-oriented Approach, 1 st
Edition, Irwin Publishing.
2. Gary J. Nutt and Addison, Operating Systems: A Modern Perspective,
2nd Edition, Wesley.
3. Maurice Bach, Design of the UNIX Operating Systems, 8 th Edition,
Prentice Hall of India.
4. Daniel P. Bovet and Marco Cesati, Understanding the Linux Kernel, 3 rd
Edition, O’Reilly and Associates.2022-2023 235
Online Resources:
1. https://www.docdroid.net/vp5Cfdg/abraham-silberschatz-operating-
system-concepts-9th201212- pdf
2. https://www.cs.uic.edu/~jbell/CourseNotes/OperatingSystems/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand fundamentals of Operating System.
2. Demonstrate the concepts of process, thread and scheduling algorithms.
3. Apply process synchronization methods to solve critical section problem.
4. Solve deadlock problems using various deadlock management techniques.
5. Compare the different memory management techniques.
6. Summarize file & disk management, protection & security concepts and
evaluate the performance of disk scheduling algorithms.
k  k  k236 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B. Tech. II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126KQ  3 0 0 3
SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Understand the software life cycle models.
2. Understand the importance of the software development process.
3. Understand the importance of modeling and modeling languages.
4. Design and develop correct and robust software product.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Software Engineering: The evolving role of software,
changing nature of software, software myths.
A Generic view of process: Software engineering- a layered technology, A
process framework, The capability maturity model integration (CMMI),
Process patterns, Process assessment, Personal and team process models.
Process models: The Waterfall model, Incremental process models,
Evolutionary process models, The unified process.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Software Requirements: Functional and non-functional requirements, User
requirements, System requirements, Interface specification, The software
requirements document.
Requirements engineering process: Feasibility studies, Requirements
elicitation and analysis, Requirements validation, Requirements management.
System models: Context models, Behavioural models, Data models, Object
models, Structured methods.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Design Engineering: Design process and design quality, Design concepts,
The design model. Creating an architectural design: Software architecture,
Data design, Architectural styles and patterns, Architectural design,
Conceptual model of UML, Basic structural modeling, Class diagrams,
Sequence diagrams, Collaboration diagrams, Use case diagrams, Component
diagrams.
Performing user interface design: Golden rules, User interface analysis
and design, Interface analysis, Interface design steps, Design evaluation.
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Testing Strategies: A strategic approach to software testing, Test strategies
for conventional software, Blackbox and white-box testing, Validation testing,
System testing, The art of debugging.2022-2023 237
Product metrics: Software quality, Metrics for analysis model, Metrics for
design model, Metrics for source code, Metrics for testing, Metrics for
maintenance.
UNIT 5: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Metrics for Process and Products: Software measurement, Metrics for
software quality.
Risk management: Reactive Vs proactive risk strategies, Software risks,
Risk identification, Risk Projection, Risk refinement, RMMM, RMMM plan.
Quality Management: Quality concepts, Software quality assurance,
Software reviews, Formal technical reviews, Statistical software quality
assurance, Software reliability, The ISO 9000 quality standards.
Text Books:
1. Roger S. Pressman, Software Engineering- A Practitioner’s Approach,
6th Edition, McGraw Hill Companies, Inc.
2. Sommerville, Software Engineering, 7 th Edition, Pearson Education.
Reference Books:
1. Grady Booch, James Rambaugh and Ivar Jacobson, The Unified Modeling
Language User Guide, 2 nd Edition, Pearson Education.
2. Waman S Jawadekar, Software Engineering Principles and Practice, The
McGraw-Hill Companies, 2004.
Online Resources:
1. https://alison.com/courses/software-engineering.
2. https://study.com/articles/List_of_Free_Online_Software_
Engineering_Courses.html
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand basic software engineering methods along with practices,
process framework and process models.
2. Analyze software requirements, SRS documents and Project
Management.
3. Develop different system models that describe the functionality of the
system.
4. Design and maintain efficient, reliable and cost effective software
solutions and suitable software metrics.
5. Understand various software testing approaches and techniques used for
software assessment.
6. Interpret the significance of Software measurement, software risks and
quality control.
k  k  k238 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126KD  3 0 0 3
FUNDAMENTALS OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To learn the difference between optimal reasoning vs human like
reasoning.
2. To understand the notions of state space representation, exhaustive search,
heuristic search.
3. To learn logic programming and different knowledge representation
techniques.
4. To understand the applications of AI like Game Playing and Expert
Systems.
5. To introduce the concept of Intelligent agents.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: History, Intelligent Systems, Foundations of AI, Sub areas of
AI & Applications.
Problem Solving - State-Space Search and Control Strategies, General
Problem
Solving Techniques, Characteristics of Problem, Exhaustive Searches,
Heuristic Search Techniques, Iterative-Deepening A*, Constraint Satisfaction.
Game Playing, Bounded Look-ahead Strategy and use of Evaluation
Functions, Alpha-Beta Pruning.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Logic Concepts and Logic Programming: Introduction, Propositional
Calculus, Propositional Logic, Natural Deduction System, Axiomatic System,
Semantic Tableau System in Propositional Logic, Resolution Algorithm,
Predicate Logic, Logic Programming.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Knowledge Representation: Introduction, Approaches to Knowledge
Representation, Knowledge Representation using Semantic Network,
Extended Semantic Networks for KR.
Uncertainty Measure - Bayesian Belief Networks, Certainty Factor Theory,
Dempster-Shafer Theory.2022-2023 239
UNIT 4: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Expert System and Applications : Introduction, Phases in Building Expert
Systems, Expert System Architecture, Expert Systems Vs Traditional Systems,
Rule based Expert Systems, Truth Maintenance Systems, Applications of
Expert Systems, List of Shells and Tools.
UNIT 5: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Intelligent Agents : Introduction, Agents vs software
programs, Classification of agents, Working of an agent, Single-agent and
Multi-agent systems, Performance Evaluation of agents, Applications, Multi-
Agent Application.
Text Books:
1. Saroj Kaushik, Artificial Intelligence, Cengage Learning, 2011.
Reference Books:
1. Rich, Knight, Nair: Artificial intelligence, Tata McGraw Hill, Third
Edition, 2009.
2. Eugene Charniak, Introduction to Artificial Intelligence, Pearson, 2007.
3. Dan W.Patterson, Introduction to Artificial Intelligence and Expert
Systems, PHI, 1990.
4. George Fluger, Artificial Intelligence, 5 th Edition, Pearson.
Online Resources:
1. http://www.vssut.ac.in/lecture_notes/lecture1428643004.pdf
2. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105077/
3. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_cs18/preview
4. https://www.edx.org/course/artificial-intelligence-ai-columbiax-csmm-
101x-4
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the basics of AI and to formulate efficient problem space
and select a search algorithm for a problem.
2. Apply AI techniques to solve problems related to Game playing.
3. Understand and apply Logic programming in problem solving.
4. Represent knowledge and uncertainty measures using appropriate
techniques.
5. Knowledge required for developing expert systems.
6. Understand the concepts of Intelligent systems.
k  k  k240 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126KE  3 0 0 3
FUNDAMENTALS OF DATA SCIENCE
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To be exposed with basics of data science.
2. To understand data pre-processing and data visualization methods on
real world data.
3. To understand machine learning methods to develop predictive model
from pre-processed data.
4. To be exposed with the working methodology of various machine learning
models.
5. To know the statistical performance metrics of machine learning methods.
6. To understand the ethical way of dealing with the data and its security.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Fundamentals of Data Science - Introduction to data science, Data analytics
life cycle, Type of data analysis, Types of jobs in data analytics, Data science
tools, Fundamental areas of study in data science, Role of SQL in data science,
Pros and cons of data science.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Data Preprocessing, Plotting and Visualization - Data types and forms,
Possible data error types, Various data preprocessing operations, Introduction
to data visualization, Visual encoding, Data visualization libraries, Basic data
visualization tools.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Statistical Data Analysis and Machine Learning-Role of statistics in data
science, Descriptive statistics, Inferential statistics, Overview of machine
learning, Supervised machine learning, Regression methods, Classification
methods, Unsupervised machine learning, Clustering methods, Association
analysis.
UNIT 4: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Time-series Analysis- Overview of time-series analysis, Components of time-
series, Time-series forecasting models.
UNIT 5: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Ethics and Data Science- The Five Cs: Consent, Clarity, Consistency and
Trust, Control and Transparency, Consequences, Implementing Five Cs,2022-2023 241
Data’s Day of Reckoning, Ethics and Security Training, Developing Guiding
Principles, Building Ethics into Data-drive Culture, Regulation. Recent Trends
in the Domain of Data Science.
Text Books:
1. Gypsi Nandi and Rupam Kumar Sharma, Data Science Fundamentals
and Practical Approaches by 1 st Edition, BPB Publications India.
2. Hilary Mason and D J Patil, Ethics and Data Science by Mike Loukides,
1st Edition, O’Reilly.
Reference Books:
1. Davy Cielen, Arno D. B. Meysman and Mohamed Ali, Introducing Data
Science, Latest Edition, Manning.
2. Jesus Rogel-Salazar, Data Science and Analytics with Python Latest
Edition, CRC Press Taylor & Francis Group.
 Online Resources:
1. http://www.biomedicahelp.altervista.org/Magistrale/Clinics/
BIC_PrimoAnno/IdentificazioneModelliDataMining/Business/
Intelligence/Carlo/Vercellis.pdf
2. https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/business-intelligence- 2nd/
9780123858894/xhtml/Title_page.html
3. https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/successful-business-
intelligence/9780071498517/title.html
4. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hg8zBJ1DhLQ
5. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/110107092
6. https://www.udemy.com/course/introduction-to-intelligence/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Design and do analysis of an enterprise datasets.
2. Apply data pre-processing and data visualization methods on real world
data.
3. Apply machine learning methods to develop predictive model from pre-
processed data.
4. Analyze the working methodology of various machine learning models.
5. Evaluate the statistical metrics of machine learning methods using suitable
performance metrics.
6. Inculcate the ethical way of dealing with the data in a secured manner.
k  k  k242 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126KP  3 0 0 3
R PROGRAMMING
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Understand the fundamental knowledge of’ ‘R’ programming.
2. Learn how to carry out a range of commonly used statistical methods
including analysis of variance and linear regression.
3. Explore data-sets to create testable hypotheses and identify appropriate
statistical tests.
4. Analyze and evaluate different types of plots, graphs and scripts.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introducing R: Getting the Hand of R, Running the R Program, Finding
Your Way with R, Command Packages.
Becoming Familiar with R: Reading and Getting Data into R, Viewing
Named Objects, Types of Data Items, The Structure of Data Items, Examining
Data Structure Working with History Commands, Saving your Work in R.
Working with Objects: Manipulating Objects, Viewing Objects within
Objects, Constructing Data Objects, Forms of Data Objects: Testing and
Converting.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Data: Descriptive statistics and tabulation.
Distribution: Looking at the Distribution of Data.
Simple Hypothesis Testing: Using the Student’s t-test, The Wilcoxon U-
Test (Mann-Whitney), Paired t- and U-Tests, Correlation and Covariance,
Tests for Association.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Graphical Analysis: Box-whisker Plots, Scatter Plots, Pairs
Plots (Multiple Correlation Plots) Line Charts, Pie Charts, Cleveland Dot
Charts, Bar Charts, Copy Graphics to Other Applications.
Formula Notation and Complex Statistics: Examples of Using Formula
Syntax for Basic tests, Formula Notation in Graphics, Analysis of Variance
(ANOV A).
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Manipulating Data and Extracting Components: Creating Data for
Complex Analysis, Summarizing Data.2022-2023 243
Regression (Linear Modeling): Simple Linear Regression, Multiple
Regression, Curvilinear Regression, Plotting Linear Models and Curve Fitting,
Summarizing Regression Models.
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
More about Graphs: Adding elements to existing plots, Matrix plots, multiple
plots in one window, exporting graphs
Writing your own scripts: Beginning to Program: Copy and Paste Scripts,
Creating Simple Functions, Making Source Code.
Text Books:
1. Dr. Mark Gardener, Beginning R the statistical programming language,
Wiley Publications, 2015.
References Books:
1. Grolemund, Hands-On Programming with R Paperback, Garrett, SPD,
2014.
2. Michael J. Crawley, The R Book, WILEY , 2012.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.udemy.com/r/online-course
2. https://www.courseera.org/learn/r-pragramming
3. https://www.codecademy.com/learn/ learn-r
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Develop and implement R analytics to create business insights of real
time projects.
2. Understand the relevant data descriptions and process in R language.
3. Learn a wide range of analytical methods and produce the quality
graphics.
4. Solve various real time problems using formula notation and statistics in
R.
5. Evaluate different data models and perform regression analysis.
6. Explore on various ways to display results through plots and scripts.
k  k  k244 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126KA  3 0 0 3
BIOMEDICAL ELECTRONICS AND APPLICATIONS
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To acquire knowledge on basics of human physiology.
2. To study different bio electrodes, biomedical transducers and
measurements of physiological parameters.
3. To deal with ECG , EEG &EMG machines, recordings and their
interpretations.
4. To learn how electronic instruments works in various departments and
laboratories of a hospital and solve engineering problems related to
medical field.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Recording Instruments
Electro Physiology and Bio potential Recording The Origin of Bio potentials
Bio potential Electrodes Biological Amplifiers ECG , EEG, EMG , PCG, EOG
Lead Systems and Recording Methods Typical Waveforms and Signal
Characteristics.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Measurement and Analysis Technique
Measurement of Blood Flow Radiographic Indicator Dye Dilution Thermal
Convection Magnetic Blood Flow Rate Ultrasonic Blood Flow meter,
Sphygmomanometer, Blood Gas Analyzer, Oximeter, Auto Analyzers,
Electrophoresis, Colorimeter, Spectrophotometer, Flame Photometer.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Therapeutic Equipment’s and Patient Safety
Stimulators- Defibrillators, Pacemakers, Diathermy, Respirators, Blood
Pumps, Ventilator, Haemodialysis Machine Role of Laser in Health Care,
Patient Safety, Macro, Micro Shock Preventive Measures, Earth Free Patient
Monitoring.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Medical Imaging
X Ray Imaging and CT scan Application and X Ray Therapy CAT Scan,
MRI, PET, Physics of Ultrasound, Ultrasound Imaging A Scan and B Scan,
Displays Multi Array Scanning, M Mode Scanning, Advantages and
Disadvantages of Ultrasound Scanning, Thermal Imaging Systems.2022-2023 245
UNIT 5: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Computer Applications in Medical Field
Computer Applications in Medicine, Patient Monitoring System, Endoscopy
Unit, Radio pill, Telemedicine and Medical Informatics.
Text Books:
1. Dr. M. Arumugam, Biomedical Instrumentation, 2 nd Edition, Anuradha
Publications, 2007.
2. Leslie Cromwell, F.J.Weibell, E.A.Pfeiffer, Biomedical Instrumentation
and Measurements, 2nd Edition, PHI, 2004.
3. John G . Webster, Medical Instrumentation, Application and Design, 3 rd
Edition, John Wiley, 2001.
Reference Books:
1. L.A. Geoddes and L.E. Baker, Principles of Applied Biomedical
Instrumentation, 3rd Edition, John Wiley and Sons, 1991.
2. R.S. Khandpur, Handbook of Biomedical Instrumentation, 2 nd Edition,
McGraw Hill, 2003.
3. A.M. Cook and J.G . Webster (eds.), Therapeutic Medical Devices:
Application and Design, Prentice Hall, 1982.
4. Arun Ghosh, Introduction to measurements and instrumentation, 3 rd
Edition, PHI learning, 2010.
5. W. F. Ganong, Review of Medical Physiology, 8 th Asian Ed, Medical,
Publishers, 1977.
6. J.J. Karr & J.M. Brown, Introduction to Biomedical Technology, 4 th
Edition, Pearson Publications, 2001.
Online Resources:
1. Prof. Sudipta Mukhopadhyay, Lectures on Biomedical Signal
Processing, IIT KGP. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105101/
Course Outcomes:
At the end of the course, the students will be able to
1. Describe the functioning and recording of human physiological
parameters using ECG, EEG , EMG systems.
2. Understanding the measurement of Blood pressure and Blood Flow
meters.
3. Explore the applications of the electronic systems as prosthetic devices
in biological and medical applications pacemakers defibrillators, Heart
lung machine etc.
4. Examine the various medical imaging techniques and discuss therapeutic
and assist devices.
5. Evaluate the practical limitations on electronic components while
handling bio substances.
6. Illustrate the various computer aided applications in the field of medical
applications.246 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126KN  3 0 0 3
PRINCIPLES OF COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Develop knowledge and understanding of the Communication
Technology components.
2. Build up capacity on wireless technologies.
3. Discuss the fundamental problems in wireless networking.
4. Provide an analytical perspective on the design and analysis of the
traditional and emerging wireless networks.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Basic Concepts of Communication Technology: Data communications
system components, Data Representation, Data flow: simplex, half-duplex,
or full–duplex, type of Connections: Point-to-Point, Multipoint, types of
physical topology, Communication models: OSI model and the TCP/IP model.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Overview of Wireless n/w. and Technologies: Introduction, Different
generations. Introduction to 1G , 2G , 3G , 4G and 5G , Bluetooth, Radio
frequency identification (Rfid), Wireless Broadband, Wireless network
topologies, Cell fundamentals and topologies, Global system for mobile
communication, GSM architecture, network aspects in GSM, GPRS network
architecture, GPRS network operation.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Mobile Computing: Architecture for mobile computing, Three tier
architecture, design considerations for mobile computing, mobile computing
through internet, Wireless network architecture, Applications, Security,
Concerns and Standards, Benefits, Future evolution of mobile computing.
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Wireless Networks: Introduction to wireless Networks, Advantages and
disadvantages of Wireless Local Area Networks, WLAN Topologies, WLAN
Standard IEEE 802.11, IEEE 802.11 Medium Access Control, Comparison
of IEEE 802.11 a, b, g and n standards, IEEE 802.16 and its enhancements,
Wireless PANs, Hiper Lan, WLL.2022-2023 247
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Telecommunication Systems: Telephone system, difference between wireless
and fixed telephone nwtworks, Paging systems, Internet Telephony. Wireless
Application Protocol(WAP), 3G Spread- spectrum Technology, FHSS, DSSS,
CDMA versus GSM, applications in 3G Wireless LAN, WiFi v/s 3G V oice
over Internet protocol.
Text Books:
1. Data Communications and Networking - Behrouz A. Forouzan, 5
th Edition
TMH, 2013.
2. Mobile Computing, Asoke K Telukder, Roopa R Yavagal, TMH
3. Wireless Communication and Networking – William Stallings, 2003, PHI
Reference Books:
1. Principles of Wireless Networks – Kaveh Pah Laven and P. Krishna
Murthy, 2002, PE
2. Wireless Communications and Networks, 3G and beyond, ITI Saha Misra,
TMH.
3. Vijay Garg, Wireless Communications and Networking, Elsevier
Publications, 2007.
Online References:
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc22_ee61/preview Communication
Networks by Prof. Goutam Das, IIT Kharagpur
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102062/: Wireless Communication by Dr.
Ranjan Bose
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, the student will be able to
1. Interpret the basic concepts of Communication Technology.
2. Comprehend wireless technology systems.
3. Devise mobile computing architecture and its standards.
4. Summarise mobile computing security concerns and applications.
5. Classify wireless Local and Wide area networks and their specifications.
6. Differentiate2G and 3G wireless standards.
k  k  k248 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126KR  3 0 0 3
VERILOG HDL
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Understand the need of Hardware Descriptive Languages.
2. Expose students to Language constructs and Conventions of Verilog HDL.
3. Design Digital Circuits using Verilog HDL.
4. Verify the Digital System Designs using Test benches.
UNIT 1: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Verilog HDL: Verilog as HDL, Levels of Design Description,
Concurrency, Simulation and Synthesis, Functional Verification, Module,
Testbench.
Language Constructs and Conventions:  Introduction, Keywords,
Identifiers, White Space Characters, Comments, Numbers, Strings, Logic
Values, Strengths, Data types, Scalars and Vectors, Parameters, Memory,
Operators, System Tasks.
UNIT 2: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Gate Level Modelling: Introduction, AND Gate Primitive, Module Structure,
Other gate Primitives, Illustrative Examples, Tristate Gates, Array of Instances
of Primitives, Design of Flip-Flops with Gate Primitives, Delays, Strengths
and Construction Resolution, Net Types, Design of Basic Circuits.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Modelling at Dataflow Level: Introduction, Continuous Assignment
Structure, Delays and Continuous Assignments, Assignments to Vectors,
Operators.
Switch Level Modelling:  Basic Transistor Switches, CMOS Switches,
Bidirectional Gates, Time Delays with Switch Primitives, Instantiation with
‘Strengths’ and ‘Delays’, Strength Contention with Trireg Nets.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Behavioural Modelling : Introduction, Operations and Assignments,
Functional Bifurcation, ‘Initial’ Construct, ‘Always’ construct, Assignments
with delays, ‘Wait’ construct, Multiple Always Blocks, Designs at Behavioural
Level, Blocking and Non-Blocking Assignments, The ‘Case’ statement,
Simulation Flow, ‘If’ and ‘If – Else’ Constructs, ‘Assign and De-Assign’2022-2023 249
Constructs, ‘Repeat’ Construct, For loop, The ‘Disable’ Construct, While
Loop, Forever loop, Parallel Blocks, ‘Force- Release’ Construct, Event.
UNIT 5: (~10 Lecture Hours)
System Tasks, Functions and Compiler Directives: Parameters, Path
Delays, Module Parameters, System Tasks and Functions, File Based Tasks
and Functions, Compiler Directives, Hierarchical Access, User Defined
Primitives.
Text Books:
1. T.R. Padmanabhan, B. Bala Tripura Sundari, Design Through Verilog
HDL, Wiley, 2009.
2. Verilog HDL-Samir Palnitkar, II Edition, Pearson Education, 2009.
Reference Books:
1. Michel D. Ciletti, Advanced Digital Design with the Verilog HDL, PHI,
2009.
2. Zainalabdien Navabi, Verilog Digital System Design, TMH, II Edition,
2006.
Online Resources:
1. Hardware Modelling using Verilog by Prof.Indranil Sengupta, IIT
Kharagpur - https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106105165
2. System Design through Verilog by Prof.Shaik Rafi Ahamed, IIT
Guwahati - https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/103/108103179/
3. Free online book:Verilog HDL: A Guide to Digital Design and Synthesis,
Second Edition by Amir Palnitkar, https://d1.amobbs.com/
bbs_upload782111/files_33/ourdev_585395BQ8J9A.pdf
Course Outcomes:
At the end of the course, the students will be able to
1. Identify the need for hardware descriptive languages, various language
Constructs and conventions of Verilog HDL.
2. Design basic digital systems using gate level and switch level HDL
modelling.
3. Build digital systems at dataflow level using Verilog HDL.
4. Demonstrate the use of behavioural level modelling constructs to design
digital systems.
5. Write test benches to analyze and verify the digital systems.
6. Implement digital circuits using advanced Verilog HDL constructs.
k  k  k250 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126KM 3 0 0 3
PRINCIPLES OF COMMUNICATIONS
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Introduce the students to modulation and various analog modulation
schemes.
2. Distinguish between Pulse, Analog and Digital Communication systems.
3. Analyze the concepts of satellite, optical communications.
4. Understand and compare cellular and telecommunication system
concepts.
UNIT 1: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: Need for Modulation, Frequency translation, Electromagnetic
spectrum, Gain, Attenuation and decibels.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Modulation Techniques: Analog Modulation- Amplitude Modulation
Fundamentals, Amplitude Modulator and Demodulator Circuits,
Fundamentals of Frequency Modulation, PAM, PWM, PPM, Pulse Code
Modulation techniques. Transmission of Binary data in communication
system-Principles of Digital transmission, Transmission efficiency, modern
concepts, wide band modulation.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Satellite Communication: Satellite Orbits, satellite communication systems,
satellite subsystems, Ground Stations Satellite Applications, Global
Positioning systems.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Optical Communication : Optical Principles, Optical Communication
Systems, Fiber-Optic Cables, Optical Transmitters & Receivers, Wavelength
Division Multiplexing.
UNIT 5: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Telecommunication Systems: Telephones Telephone system, Facsimile,
Internet Telephony. Cellular Communications: Cell phone technologies-
Cellular telephone systems, Mobile phone systems, Digital cell phone
systems(2G ,2.5G,UMTS 3G ,4G).2022-2023 251
Text Books:
1. Louis E. Frenzel -Principles of Electronic Communication Systems, 3 rd
Edition, McGraw Hill publications, 2008.
2. K.Sam Shanmugam, Digital and Analog Communication Systems,
JohnWiley and Sons, 2004.
Reference Books:
1. Theodore S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications-Principles and
practice, Prentice Hall, 2002.
2. Roger L. Freeman, Fundamentals of Telecommunications, 2 nd Edition,
Wiley Publications.
Online Resources:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104098/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Analyze the basic concepts of modulation and understand the different
kinds of analog modulation techniques.
2. Understand and analyze the different types of pulse analog and digital
modulation systems.
3. Describe the Telephone systems and network fundamentals.
4. State the operative physical principle of launching satellites and explain
the concept & operation of GPS.
5. Comprehend about the principle of optical communication system,
functioning of optical cables and wave division multiplexing.
6. Describe the cellphone operational concepts.
k  k  k252 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126KC  3 0 0 3
ENGINEERING MATERIALS
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisite: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To impart knowledge on the concepts of Dielectric electric materials in
comparison with magnetic materials.
2. To introduce special purpose materials.
3. To make students familiar with the concepts of different materials for
electrical applications.
4. To familiarize students with the concepts of semiconductor materials.
UNIT 1: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Electrical Materials Introduction: Types of Materials, Properties
Dielectric materials: Types-Solid, Liquid and Gaseous dielectrics - Electric
conductivity in Solid, Liquid and Gaseous dielectrics.
UNIT 2: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Semiconductor Materials
Types of semiconductors, properties, Doping Techniques, - Current carriers
in Semiconductor- Photoconductors, Characteristics.
UNIT 3: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Magnetic Materials
Classification of Magnetic Materials, Properties, Curie point, Magnetically
soft and hard Materials- Feebly Magnetic Materials, Cermet Permanent
Magnets, Ageing of Magnets - Factors effecting Permeability and Hysteresis.
UNIT 4: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Special Purpose Materials
Refractory Materials, Radioactive Materials, Insulating varnishes and
coolants, Properties and Applications of mineral oils, Testing of Transformer
Oil as per BIS, IEC.
UNIT 5: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Materials for Specific Applications
Materials for solar cells and battery, Materials for coatings for enhanced solar
thermal energy collection, Cold Mirror Coatings, Heat Mirror Coatings,
Antireflection Coatings.2022-2023 253
Text Books:
1. R K Rajput, A course in Electrical Engineering Materials, Laxmi
Publications, 2009.
2. C S Indulkar and S Thiruvengadam, An introduction to Electrical
Engineering Materials, Revised Edition, S. Chand & Company, 2013.
3. T K Basak, A course in Electrical Engineering Materials, New Age
Science Publications, 2009.
Reference Books:
1. A.J. Dekker, Electrical Engineering Materials, PHI Publication, 2006.
2. TTTI Madras, Electrical Engineering Materials, McGraw Hill Education,
2004.
Course Outcomes:
At the end of the course, the students will be able to
1. Distinguish between different types of materials by virtue of their
properties.
2. Categorize & analyze Dielectric and semiconductor materials.
3. Classify the magnetic materials using their properties.
4. Differentiate & identify special-purpose materials for electrical
applications.
5. Identify special-purpose materials for non-electrical applications.
6. Analyze the working of materials from the point of view of specific
applications in electrical & other fields.
k  k  k254 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. II Semester L T P C
Course Code:126KL  3 0 0 3
OPERATIONS RESEARCH
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course objectives:
1. Define and formulate linear programming problems and appreciate their
limitations.
2. Solve linear programming problems using appropriate techniques and
optimization solvers, interpret the results obtained and translate solutions
into directives for action.
3. Develop mathematical skills to analyze and solve dynamic programming
models arising from a wide range of applications
4. Help students develop the ability to make informed decisions based on
quantitative analysis.
UNIT 1: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Operations Research: Basics definition, scope, objectives,
phases, models and limitations of Operations Research. Linear Programming
Problem-Formulation of LPP, Graphical solution of LPP. Simplex Method,
Artificial variables, big-M methods, Special cases in LP- Degeneracy,
unbounded, infeasibility & alternative optima.
UNIT 2: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Transportation Problem: Formulation, solution, unbalanced Transportation
problem. Finding basic feasible solutions-Northwest corner rule, least cost
method and V ogel’s approximation method. Optimality test by MODI method
& stepping stone method.
UNIT 3: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Assignment model : Formulation. Hungarian method for optimal solution.
Solving unbalanced Assignment problem.
Sequencing models : Solution of sequencing Problem-Processing n jobs
through 2 Machines- Processing n jobs through 3 Machines-Processing n
jobs through m Machines. Processing 2 jobs through m-machines.
UNIT 4: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Dynamic programming: Characteristics of dynamic programming. Dynamic
programming approach for Coach/Shortest Path and cargo loading problems.
Inventory models: Inventory costs. Models with deterministic demand-model
(a) demand rate uniform and production rate infinite, model (b) demand rate
uniform and production rate finite.2022-2023 255
UNIT 5: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Games Theory: Competitive games rectangular game saddle point, minimax
(maximin) method of optimal strategies, and value of the game. Solution of
games with saddle points, dominance principle. Rectangular games without
saddle point-mixed strategy for 2*2 games.
Replacement Models : Replacement of Items that deteriorate whose
maintenance costs increase with time without change in the money value,
Replacement of items that fail suddenly: individual replacement policy, group
replacement policy.
Text Books
1. S.D.Sharna, Operations research theory methods and applications, 2020
th
edition, Kedar Nath Ram Nath, 2014.
2. J K Sharma, Operations Research, theory and applications, 6 th edition,
Macmillan India Ltd, 2017.
Reference Books
1. H.A. Taha, Operations Research, An Introduction, PHI, 2008.
2. F.H. Hillier and G .J. Lieberman, Introduction to Operations Research,
Tata-McGraw-Hill, 2010.
Online Resources:
1. Website/ Materials: IOR Tutorials (Interactive Operations Research
Tutorial)
2. Onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in
Course Outcomes:
At the end of the course students are expected to
1. Apply linear programming models to several Engineering Applications.
2. To use several other techniques like Transportation, Assignment, and
Sequencing Models in the real world applications.
3. In Dynamic Programming selected models were taught.
4. Apply simple mathematical models in Inventory into the real Engineering
Applications.
5. Solve Game theory problems related to business applications
6. Develop optimum replacement policy.
k  k  k256 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126KJ  3 0 0 3
INTRODUCTION TO DATA ANALYTICS
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To learn the importance of data and its types.
2. To understand Regression Analysis and Multi Variate Data.
3. To gain a basic knowledge on Machine learning.
4. To study Non-Linear Optimization Techniques.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Fundamentals of Data Analytics: Role of data analytics in science and
engineering, types of data and data summarization methods, levels of
measurement, data storytelling, data journalism, data warehousing.
UNIT 2: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Simple-Linear Regression: Simple Linear regression model, estimate
regression coefficients, properties of least square estimators, estimation of

, confidence intervals and test for  & 1, ANOV A, Coefficient of
determination.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Multiple Linear Regression : Multiple Linear Regression using Matrix
Method-Test for significance for Regression coefficients-ANOV A,
Regularization methods- LASSO, RIDGE, and Elastic nets.
UNIT 4: (~12 Lecture Hours)
Foundation for Machine learning:
Machine learning Techniques- Overview, Introduction to Multivariate data,
Principal Component Analysis, Dimensionality reduction -Linear
Discriminant Analysis -Naive -Baye’s classification, Hierarchical
(Agglomerative) clustering, Non-Hierarchical clustering (K-means
algorithm).
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Non-Linear Optimization Techniques:
Problem Formulation for Nonlinear Programming, Unconstrained
optimization (Hessian Matrix Method), Constrained multivariate optimization
with equality constraints (Lagrangian Multipliers Technique), constrained
Multivariate optimization with inequality constraints (Kuhn Tucker
conditions).2022-2023 257
Text Books:
1. S.P.Gupta, Statistical Methods , Sultan  Chand & Sons, 46 th Edition.
2. Galit Shmueli, Peter C. Bruce, Inbal Yahav, Nitin R. Patel, Kenneth C.
Lichtendahl Jr.- Data Mining for Business Analytics Concepts, Techniques
and Applications in R, Wiley Publications.
3. Operations Research by Er. Prem Kumar Gupta, Dr. D. S. Hira, S. Chand
Publications.
Reference Books:
1. Montgomery, Douglus C., and George C.Runger. Applied Statistics and
Probability for Engineers John Wiley & Sons  2010.
2. Tang-Ning-Tan, Micheal-Steinbach, Vipin Kumar, Anuj Karpatne,
Introduction to Data Mining, Pearson India Education Services Ltd.
(2016).
3. Roxy Peck,San Luis Obispo, Iowa Jay L. Devore ,Introduction to Statistics
and Data Analysis, Cengage Learning, 5
th Edition.
4. Cole Nussbaumer Knaflic, Story Telling with Data, wiley Publications.
5. Hiller and Lieberman, Introduction to Operation Research, McGraw Hill
Higher Education, 7
th edition.
Online Resources:
1. E-book on Multivariate Data Analysis. https://www.drnishikantjha.com/
papersCollection/Multivariate%20Data%20Analysis.pdf
2. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/book/10.1002/9781119296294
3. nptel.ac.in/courses/ Introduction to Data Analytics
Course outcomes:
After completing the course, the student will be able to
1. Understand the definitions and concepts associated with Data Analysis.
2. Determine the Simple Linear regression coefficient and test the
significance.
3. Estimate the Multiple Linear regression coefficient and test the
significance.
4. Implement the knowledge of Multivariate data and regularization
methods.
5. Acquire basic concepts in Machine learning.
6. Learn about Optimization techniques.
k  k  k258 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126KH  3 0 0 3
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisites:  -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Educate the importance of IPR in Engineering
2. Enlighten the various types of IP’s and their protection.
3. Maintain IPR’s for Business sustainability.
UNIT 1: (~09 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Intellectual property
Intellectual property: Introduction – Features - Types of Intellectual property
- Importance of Intellectual property rights - International organizations -
Agencies and treaties, Conventions.
UNIT 2: (~08 Lecture Hours)
Patents
Patents: Concept of Patent – Duration – Patent Process – Patent searching –
Procedure for filing of Patents - Ownership, Transfer, Assignment and
Licensing of Patent – Remedies for Infringement of Patents.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Copyrights and Trademarks
Copyrights – Fundamental of Copyright law - Originality of material- Rights
of Reproduction - Rights to perform the work publicly - Copyright Ownership
issues -  Copyright registration - Notice of Copyright - Remedies for
infringement in Copyrights.
Trademarks – Purpose and functions of Trademarks - Acquisition of
Trademark rights - Protectable matter - Selecting and evaluating Trademark
- Trademarks registration process – Remedies for infringement in Trade marks.
UNIT 4: (~08 Lecture Hours)
Industrial Designs
Industrial Designs – Importance of Industrial Design – Essential requirement
of Registration – Registration Process of Industrial Designs – Benefits of
registration – Assignment, Transmission and Licensing of Industrial Designs
- Remedies for infringement of Designs.2022-2023 259
UNIT 5: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Trade Secrets
Trade Secrets – Trade secret law – Determinants of Trade secret status -
Liability for misappropriation of Trade Secrets – Protection for submission -
Trade secret litigation – Unfair competition – Interface between Intellectual
Property Rights and Competition – Safeguards against Unfair competition.
Intellectual property audits – Types of IP Audit – Procedure of Preparing
Audit – Auditing IP Assets.
Text Books:
1. Deborah. E. Bouchoux (2015) Intellectual property right, 4
th Edition,
Cengage learning.
2. Prabuddha Ganguli (2017) Intellectual property right – Unleashing the
knowledge economy, 4th Edition,Tata McGraw Hill Publishing company
ltd.
Reference Books:
1. S.P Satarkar (2003) Intellectual Property Rights and Copyrights, Ess Ess
Publications.
2. Kompal Bansal, Parikshit Bansal (2020) Fundamentals of Intellectual
property for Engineers, BS Publications.
Online Resources:
1. Introduction on Intellectual Property to Engineers and Technologists
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109105112/
Course Outcomes :
After learning the contents of this course, the student must be able to
1. Understand the dynamics and legalistic framework of IPR
2. Acquaint the procedure of securing patents and its procedure.
3. Acquire information and make use of Copy right protection.
4. Examine the eminence of trade marks in growth of Business.
5. Identify the importance of safeguarding Industrial designs.
6. Sustain Trade Secrets and aspects of IP audit.
k  k  k260 Computer Science and Engineering
III Year B.Tech. II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 126KB  3 0 0 3
DISASTER MANAGEMENT
(Open Elective-1)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To introduce the basic concepts in Disaster Management.
2. To explain the different types of natural and manmade disasters.
3. To provide the information on Disaster Management Mechanism.
4. To introduce the concept of capacity building, safety in industries.
5. To provide an overview on the roles of national and international
cooperation in disaster management.
6. To explain the application of spatial technologies in disaster management.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Disaster Management : Introduction – Hazard, Disaster,
Vulnerability, Risk, Capacity Building, Environmental Hazard, Disaster and
Stress, Disaster Phenomena and Events (Global, National and Regional).
Classification -  Natural and Man-made Hazards (Planetary, Extra Planetary,
Endogenous and Exogenous Hazards). Climate Change Impact – (Global
Warming, Ozone Layer Depletion, Deforestation, Forest Fires).
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Planetary and Extra Planetary Hazards: Endogenous Hazards and
Exogenous Hazards. Earthquakes, Landslides, Volcanic Eruptions –
Causes, Effects, distribution, human adjustment, perception and mitigation
measures
Cyclones, Floods, Droughts, Cold Waves and Heat Waves - Causes, Effects,
distribution, human adjustment, perception and mitigation measures.
Extra Planetary Hazards and Disasters – Asteroids, Meteoroids, Meteors,
Meteorites.
Man Induced Hazards and Disasters – Nuclear Hazards (Chernobyl),
Industrial/ Chemical – (Bhopal Gas Tragedy), Biological – (Covid-19), Road
and Rail Accidents, Plane Crash.
UNIT 3: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Disaster Management Mechanism: Disaster Management Cycle –
Prevention, Mitigation, Preparedness, Response, Recovery and Rehabilitation.
Planning  for Relief. Concepts of Risk Management  and Crisis Management
– (Risk Reduction and Survival Strategies).2022-2023 261
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) - Structural and Non-Structural Measures;
Risk Analysis, Vulnerability and Capacity Assessment; Early Warning
Systems, Post Disaster Environmental Response (Water, Sanitation, Food
Safety, Waste Management, Disease Control, Security, Communications);
Roles and Responsibilities of Government, Community, Local Institutions,
NGOs and other Stakeholders; Policies and Legislation for Disaster Risk
Reduction, Industrial Safety Plan.
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
National & International Co-Operation in Disaster Management:
DRR Programmes in India and the activities of National Disaster Management
Authority, Role of NDMA, NDRF, NIDM in Disaster Management, NDMA
Guidelines, Disaster Management Act, 2005 and National Policy on Disaster
Management, 2009, The National Disaster Management Plan, 2016,
Organizational Structure for Disaster Management. Global Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction (Sendai Framework, Paris Agreement, Sustainable
Development Goals, Hyogo Framework, Yokohoma Strategy on Disaster Risk
Reduction). Bilateral Agreements, Use of latest technologies – Remote
Sensing (RS) and Geological Information System (GIS).
Text Books:
1. Manual on Disaster Management, National Disaster Management Agency,
Govt of India.
2. Disaster Management by Mrinalini Pandey, Wiley, 1
st Edition, 2014.
3. Disaster Science and Management by T. Bhattacharya, McGraw Hill
Education (India) Private Limited, 2015.
4. Disaster Mitigation: Experiences and Reflections by Pradeep Sahni, PHI
Learning Private Limited, 2010.
5. Natural Hazards and Disasters by Donald Hyndman and David Hyndman
- Cengage Learning, 2006.
6. UNEP – Disaster Risk Reduction - https://www.unep.org/explore-topics/
disasters-conflicts/what- we-do/risk-reduction
Reference Books:
1. Earth and Atmospheric Disasters Management by N. Pandharinath, CK
Rajan, BS Publications, 2009.
2. Environmental Geography by R. B. Singh, Heritage Publishers, New
Delhi, 1990.
3. Environmental Geography by Savinder Singh, Prayag Pustak Bhawann,
1997.
4. The Environment as Hazards by B. I. Kates and G. F. White. Oxford
Press, New York, 1978.262 Computer Science and Engineering
5. Disaster Management by R. B. Singh, Rawat Publication, New Delhi,
2000.
6. Disaster Management by H. K. Gupta, Universities Press, India, 2003.
7. Space Technology for Disaster Mitigation in India (INCED) by R. B.
Singh, University of Tokyo, 1994.
8. Disaster Management in Hills by Satender, Concept Publishing Co., New
Delhi, 2003.
9. An Overview on Natural and Manmade Disaster and their Reduction by
R. K. Bhandani, CSIR, New Delhi.
10. Manuals on Natural Disaster Management in India by M. C. Gupta,
National Centre for Disaster Management, IIPA, New Delhi, 2001.
Web Resources:
l National Disaster Management Plan, Ministry of Home affairs,
Government of India (http://www.ndma.gov.in/images/policyplan/
dmplan/draftndmp.pdf).
l National Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM) (https://nidm.gov.in)
l WHO–Disaster Management Resources- https://www.who.int/surgery/
publications/immesc_disaster_management/en/
Online Courses:
l https://swayam.gov.in/courses/4983-disaster-management
l https://reliefweb.int/training/2455444/free-online-course-disaster-risk-
reduction-and-management
l https://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/events/47107
l https://www.futurelearn.com/courses/disaster-management/2
l https://www.ifrc.org/en/get-involved/learning-education-training/
certified-professional- development-courses/online-certificate-
programme-in-disaster-management/
Course Outcomes:
At the end of the course, the student will be able to
1. Explain and differentiate disasters and their vulnerabilities - causes,
impacts and mitigation measures.
2. Articulate the disaster management mechanism in natural and man
induced disasters.
3. Design Industrial Safety Plan for Industrial Hazards.
4. Plan and implement for the Disaster Risk Reduction.
5. Prepare disaster management plan for specific disasters with the help of
national and international agencies.
k  k  k2022-2023 263
IV  Year B.Tech I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127KY  3 0 0 3
INTERNET OF THINGS
(Open Elective-2)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To introduce the terminology, technology and its applications.
2. To introduce the concept of M2M (machine to machine) with necessary
protocols.
3. To introduce the Python Scripting Language which is used in many IoT
devices.
4. To introduce the Raspberry Pi platform, that is widely used in IoT
applications.
5. To introduce the implementation of web based services on IoT devices.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to  Internet of Things-Definition and Characteristics of IoT,
Physical Design of IoT-IoT Protocols, IoT Communication Models, IoT
Communication APIs. IoT enabled Technologies- Wireless Sensor Networks,
Cloud Computing, Big data analytics, Communication protocols, Embedded
Systems, IoT Levels and Templates Domain Specific IoTs-Home, City,
Environment, Energy, Retail, Logistics, Agriculture, Industry, Health and
Lifestyle.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
IoT and M2M-Software Defined Networks, Network Function Virtualization,
Difference between SDN and NFV for IoT Basics of IoT System Management
with NETCONF, YANG-NETCONF, YANG , and SNMP NETOPEER.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Python - Language features of Python, Data types, data
structures, Control of flow, functions, Modules, packaging, File Handling,
Date/Time Operations, Classes, Exception handling Python packages -JSON,
XML, HTTPLib, URLLib, SMTPLib.
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
IoT Physical  Devices and Endpoints-Introduction to Raspberry Pi-Interfaces
(serial, SPI, I2C) Programming-Python program with Raspberry Pi with focus
of interfacing external gadgets, Controlling Output and Reading input from
pins.264 Computer Science and Engineering
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
IoT Physical Servers and Cloud Offerings – Introduction to Cloud Storage
models and communication APIs Web server – Web server for IoT, Cloud for
IoT, Python web application framework, Designing a REST ful web API.
Text Books:
1. Arshdeep Bahga and Vijay Madisetti, Internet of Things - A Hands-on
Approach, Universities Press, 2015, ISBN: 9788173719547.
2. Matt Richardson and Shawn Wallace, Getting Started with RaspberryPi,
O’Reilly (SPD), 2014, ISBN: 9789350239759.
Reference Books:
1. David, Hanes and Salgueiro Gonzalo, IoT Fundamentals: Networking
Technologies, Protocols and Use Cases for the Internet of Things, Pearson
2017.
2. Dirk Slama and Frank Puhlmann, Enterprise IoT: Strategies and Best
Practices for Connected Products and Servicesby 2015.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.tutorialspoint.com
2. https://www.edureka.co
3. https://www.onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the IoT Systems.
2. Apply the concept of M2M (machine to machine) with necessary
protocols.
3. Create programs using python scripting language in IoT devices.
4. Build programs for Raspberry Pi interfaces.
5. Choose to communicate with IoT Systems through web-interface.
6. Apply IoT principles for domain specific applications.
k  k  k2022-2023 265
IV Year B.Tech I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127KT  3 0 0 3
CYBER SECURITY
(Open Elective-2)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To familiarize various types of cyber-attacks and cyber-crimes, Laws
and IT Acts.
2. To study the defensive techniques against Cyber attacks.
3. To explore various security challenges faced by mobile workforce and
their implications under Cybercrime.
4. To determine various web threats faced by organizations and understand
about Social Media Networking.
5. To understand various data privacy issues and role of Cyber Forensics.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Cybercrime: Introduction, Cybercrime – Definitions and
origins of the word, and Information Security, Who are Cybercriminals,
Classifications of Cybercrimes, And Cybercrime: The legal Perspectives and
Indian Perspective, Cybercrime and the Indian ITA 2000 - Hacking and the
Indian Law(s), A Global Perspective on Cybercrimes – Cybercrime and the
Extended Enterprise.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Cyber Offenses: How Criminals Plan Them: Introduction – Categories of
Cybercrime, How Criminals plan the Attacks – Reconnaissance, Passive
Attacks, Active Attacks, Scanning and Scrutinizing Gathered Information,
Attack, Social Engineering, Cyber stalking – Types, Cases reported on
Cyberstalking, Working of Stalking, Real-Life incident of Cyberstalking,
Cybercafé and Cybercrimes, Botnets: The Fuel for Cybercrime, Attack Vector,
Cloud Computing.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Cybercrime: Mobile and Wireless Devices: Introduction, Proliferation of
Mobile and Wireless Devices, Trends in Mobility, Credit card Frauds in Mobile
and Wireless Computing Era, Security Challenges Posed by Mobile Devices,
Registry Settings for Mobile Devices, Authentication service Security, Attacks
on Mobile/Cell Phones.
Mobile Devices: Security Implications for Organizations, Organizational
Measures for Handling Mobile, Organizational Security Policies and Measures
in Mobile Computing Era, Laptops.266 Computer Science and Engineering
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Privacy Issues
Basic Data Privacy Concepts: Fundamental Concepts, Data Privacy Attacks,
Data linking and profiling, privacy policies and their specifications, privacy
policy languages, privacy in different domains- medical, financial, etc.
Cybercrime: Examples and Mini-Cases Examples : Official Website of
Maharashtra Government Hacked, Indian Banks Lose Millions of Rupees,
Parliament Attack, Pune City Police Bust Nigerian Racket, e-mail spoofing
instances.
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Cyber Security: Organizational Implications Introduction, Cost of
Cybercrimes and IPR issues, Web threats for Organizations, Security and
Privacy Implications. Social Media marketing: Security Risks and Perils
for Organizations, Social Computing and the associated challenges for
Organizations.
Cyber Forensics:
Introduction, Historical background of Cyber forensics, Digital Forensics
Science, The Need for Computer Forensics, Cyber Forensics and Digital
evidence, Forensics Analysis of Email, Digital Forensics Lifecycle, Forensics
Investigation, Challenges in Computer Forensics, Special Techniques for
Forensics Auditing.
Text Books:
1. Nina Godbole and SunitBelpure, Cyber Security Understanding Cyber
Crimes, Computer Forensics and Legal Perspectives, Wiley.
2. B.B.Gupta,D.P.Agrawal,HaoxiangWang,ComputerandCyberSecurity:
Principle s, Algorithm, Applications, and Perspectives, CRC Press, ISBN
9780815371335,2018.
Reference Books:
1. James Graham, Richard Howard and Ryan Otson, Cyber Security
Essentials, CRC Press.
2. Chwan-Hwa (john) Wu and J.David Irwin, Introduction to Cyber Security,
CRC Press T&F Group.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.open.edu/openlearn/futurelearn/cyber-security
2. https://cloudian.com/guides/data-protection/data-protection-and-privacy-
7-ways-to-protect- user-data/
3. https://www.cybersecurityeducation.org/resources/
4. https://onlinecourses-swayam2-ac- in.translate.goog/nou19_cs08/
preview?_x_tr_sl=en&_x_tr_tl=ta&_x_tr_hl=ta&_x_tr_pto=sc2022-2023 267
5. https://www.mygreatlearning.com/academy/learn-for-free/courses/cyber-
forensics.
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the evolution of Internet in the context of emerging Cyber
threats and their laws.
2. Distinguish the forms of Cybercriminal activities and Social Engineering
methods used to undertake crimes.
3. Understand the Security challenges posed by mobile and wireless devices.
4. Define privacy policies and their specifications.
5. Apply risk management policies to protect organization’s critical
information and forensically investigate security incidents.
6. Understand real time cybercrimes to assess the scenarios in India, Global
and Legal Perspectives.
k  k  k268 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127KZ  3 0 0 3
MACHINE LEARNING BASICS
(Open Elective-2)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To be able to identify machine learning problems corresponding to
different applications.
2. To understand a various machine learning algorithms along with their
strengths and weaknesses.
3. To understand the basic theory underlying machine learning.
4. To Introduce Decision Tree learning, Instance Based Learning techniques.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: Well posed learning problems, designing a learning system
Perspectives and issues in machine learning.
Concept Learning : Concept learning task, Concept Learning as search
through a hypothesis space, Finding maximally specific hypothesis, Version
spaces and the Candidate-Elimination algorithm, Inductive Bias.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Decision Tree Learning: Decision Tree representation, appropriate problems
for Decision Tree Learning, Hypothesis space search in Decision Tree
Learning,Issues in Decision Tree Learning.
Neural Network Learning: Introduction, The Neuron Model, Activation
Functions, Neural Network Architecture: Single-Layer Feed-Forward
Networks, Multi-Layer Feed-Forward Networks.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Support Vector Machines: Introduction, Linear Classifier, Non-linear
Classifier, Training SVM, Support Vector Regression.
Bayesian Learning: Bayes theorem and concept learning, Minimum
Description Length Principle, Bayes optimal classifier, Gibbs Algorithm,
Naïve Bayes Classifier, The EM algorithm.
UNIT 4: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Computational Learning Theory: Sample complexity for finite and infinite
hypothesis spaces, Mistake bound model.
Instance – Based Techniques: K-nearest neighbor Learning, Locally
Weighted Regression, Radial Basis Function, Case Based reasoning, Remarks
on Lazy vs Eager learning.2022-2023 269
UNIT 5: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Genetic Algorithm: Biological motivation, Representing Hypothesis, Genetic
Operators, Fitness function and selection, Models of Evolution and Learning,
Parallelizing Genetic Algorithms.
Text Books:
1. Tom M. Mitchell, Machine Learning, McGraw Hill Education, Edition
2013
Reference Books:
1. Saroj Kaushik, Artificial Intelligence, CENGAGE Learning, 2011.
2. Trevor Hasti, Robert Tibshirani and Jerome Friedman, The Elements of
Statistical Learning, 2
nd Edition, Springer Series in Statistics, 2001.
3. Stephen Marsland, Machine Learning - An Algorithmic Perspective, CRC
Press, 2009.
Online Resources:
1. http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~tom/
2. http://www.holehouse.org/mlclass/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Gain Knowledge on the basic theory in machine learning
2. Understand machine learning problems corresponding to different
applications.
3. Identify machine learning techniques appropriate to respective problems.
4. Compare various machine learning algorithms along with their strengths
and weaknesses.
5. Analyze the machine learning algorithms under supervised and
unsupervised paradigms.
6. Apply different learning algorithms to solve problems of moderate
complexity.
k  k  k270 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127KU  3 0 0 3
DATA VISUALIZATION USING PYTHON
(Open Elective-2)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To understand the basics and data pre-processing techniques of data
visualization.
2. Learn various techniques for visualization of data.
3. To draw the plots and learn how to customize them.
4. To Plot charts with images and maps.
5. To design the right plot to understand the data.
UNIT 1: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Data & Visualization: Data foundations – Types of Data –
Nominal, Ordinal, Interval, Ratio Scaled.
Data Pre-processing: Why Pre-process the data? Descriptive Data
Summarization – Measuring the Central Tendency, Measuring the Dispersion
of Data – Ratio scaled.
UNIT 2: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Visualizing Data: Mapping Data on to Aesthetics and Types of Data, Scales
Map Data values on to Aesthetics,
Drawing your first plot and customizing them: Defining plot types – Bar,
Line, and stacked charts. Defining plot line styles, properties, and format
strings. Adding a legend and annotations. Making histograms, making pie
charts count, Plotting with filled areas.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
More plots and Customization: Adding a data table to the figure, using
subplots, filling an under-plot area.
Plotting charts with images: Processing images with PIL, plotting with
images, displaying an image with other plots in the figure.
UNIT 4: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Plotting charts with Maps: Plotting data on a map using base map, plotting
data on a map using google API, Generating CAPTCHA images.
Using Right plots to understand the Data: Using scatter plots and
histograms, plotting the cross correlations between two variables, importance
of auto correlation.2022-2023 271
UNIT 5: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Making 3D visualizations: Creating 3D bars and Creating 3D Histograms.
Case Studies on Data Visualization using Python: Visualizations in python
on sales data, any other case study on real time dataset.
Text Books:
1. Igor Milovanovic, Python Data Visualization Cookbook, PACKT
publishing, 2013.
2. Claus O. Wilke, Fundamentals of Data Visualization, First Release
Edition, O’Reilly Publication.
Reference Books:
1. Daniel Keim, Georges Grinstein and Matthew O. Ward, Interactive Data
Visualization Foundations, Techniques, and Applications, Natick,
Massachusetts: A K Peters, Ltd.
2. Kieran Healy, Data Visualization: A Practical Introduction, 1 st Edition,
Princeton University Press.
3. Edward R. Tufte, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information, 2 nd
Edition, Graphics Press.
Online Resources:
1. https://clauswilke.com/dataviz/
2. https://www.coursera.org/learn/python-for-data-visualization
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand fundamental computer knowledge in the visualization process
and pre-processing of the data.
2. Analyze the tools for creating, importing & exporting data, and generate
reports using different chart types.
3. Able to design plots and how customize them.
4. Knowledge on visualizing images, maps and generating CAPTCHAs.
5. Understand the data and choose correct visualization to that.
6. Able to apply data visualization techniques on real-time datasets.
k  k  k272 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127KV  3 0 0 3
SENSORS AND ACTUATORS
(Open Elective-2)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To create a conceptual understanding of the  basic principles of sensors,
actuators, and their operations.
2. To promote awareness regarding recent developments in the fields of
sensors and actuators
3. To provide an idea of strengths and weaknesses of the various types of
sensors and actuators.
4. To analyze different types of Sensors, Pneumatic, Hydraulic, and Micro
actuators.
UNIT 1: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Sensors/Transducers: Principles, Classification, Parameters, Characteristics,
Environmental Parameters (EP), Characterization.
Mechanical and Electromechanical Sensors: Introduction, Resistive
Potentiometer, Strain Gauge, Resistance Strain Gauge, Semiconductor Strain
Gauges, Inductive Sensors- Sensitivity and Linearity of the Sensor.
Types: Capacitive Sensors, Electrostatic Transducer, Force/Stress Sensors
using Quartz Resonators, Ultrasonic Sensors.
UNIT 2: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Thermal Sensors : Introduction, Gas thermometric Sensors, Thermal
Expansion Type Thermometric Sensors, Acoustic Temperature Sensor,
Dielectric Constant and Refractive Index Thermo-sensors, Resistance Change
Type Thermometric Sensors.
Magnetic Sensors: Introduction, Sensors and the Principles Behind,
Magneto-resistive Sensors, Anisotropic Magneto-resistive Sensing,
Semiconductor Magneto-resistors, Inductance and Eddy Current Sensors,
Angular/Rotary Movement Transducers.
UNIT 3: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Smart Sensors: Introduction, Primary Sensors, Excitation, Amplification,
Filters, Converters, Compensation, Information Coding/Processing, Data
Communication, Standards for Smart Sensor Interface, Automation.2022-2023 273
UNIT 4: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Actuators: Definition, types and selection of Actuators; linear; rotary; Logical
and Continuous Actuators, Pneumatic actuator- Electro-Pneumatic actuator;
cylinder, rotary actuators. Mechanical actuating system: Hydraulic actuator -
Control valves; Construction, Characteristics and Types, Selection criteria.
UNIT 5: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Micro Actuators: Actuation principle, shape memory effects-one way, two
way and pseudo elasticity. Types of micro actuators- Electrostatic-Linear,
Rotary, Resonant, Electro Hydrodynamic Magnetic- Thermo magnetic,
Magnetostatic micro actuators.
Text Books:
1. D. Patranabis, Sensors and Transducers, Prentice Hall India Pvt., 2 nd Ed,
2021.
2. Massood Tabib and Azar, Microactuators Electrical, Magnetic, thermal,
optical, mechanical, chemical and smart structures, First edition, Kluwer
academic publishers, Springer, 1997.
3. Manfred Kohl, Shape Memory Actuators, first edition, Springer.
Reference Books:
1. Robert H Bishop, The Mechatronics Hand Book, CRC Press, 2002.
2. Clarence W. De Silva, “Sensors and Actuators Engineering System
Instrumentation”, Taylor & Francis Ltd, 2
nd Ed, 2015.
Online Resources:
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc21_ee32/preview
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108108147
Course Outcomes:
At the end of the course, the students will be able to
1. List the different types of sensors and actuators based on their working
principle.
2. Classify different Sensors & Actuators based on various physical
phenomena and differentiate their performance characteristics
3. Interpret the functional principles of sensors and actuators.
4. Demonstrate the working operations, strengths, and weaknesses of the
various types of sensors and actuators.
5. Distinguish different types of sensors and actuators based on their
mathematical model.
6. Select the relevant Sensors, Pneumatic, Hydraulic and Micro actuators
for real-time advanced applications.274 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127KW  3 0 0 3
ELEMENTS OF SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS
(Open Elective-2)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Acquire foundation in orbital mechanics for the satellites with
Applications of satellite Communication.
2. Provide basic knowledge of Satellite Sub Systems.
3. Familiarize basic knowledge of Link Design of Satellite.
4. Understand Earth Station Technology.
5. Understand the concepts of LEO , GEO stationary Satellite systems.
UNIT 1: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: Origin of Satellite Communications, Historical Back-ground,
Basic Concepts of Satellite Communications, Frequency Allocations for
Satellite Services, Applications, Future Trends of Satellite Communications.
Orbital Mechanics: Orbital Mechanics, Look Angle determination, Orbital
Perturbations, Orbit determination, Orbital Effects in Communication Systems
Performance.
UNIT 2: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Satellite Subsystems: Attitude and Orbit Control System, Telemetry,
Tracking, Command And Monitoring, Power Systems, Communication
Subsystems, Satellite Antennas, Equipment Reliability and Space
Qualification.
UNIT 3: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Satellite Link Design: Basic Transmission Theory, System Noise Temperature
and G/T Ratio, Design of Down Links, Up Link Design, Design Of Satellite
Links For Specified C/N, System Design Examples.
UNIT 4: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Earth Station Technology: Introduction, Transmitters, Receivers, Antennas,
Tracking Systems, Terrestrial Interface, Primary Power Test Methods.
UNIT 5: (~ 12 Lecture Hours)
Low Earth Orbit and Non Geo-Stationary Satellite Systems: Orbit
Considerations, Coverage and Frequency Consideration, Delay & Throughput
Considerations, System Considerations, Operational NGSO Constellation
Designs.2022-2023 275
Text Books:
1 Satellite Communications – Timothy Pratt, Jeremy Allnutt, WSE, Wiley
Publications, 3rd Edition, 2019.
2 Satellite Communication by Robert M. Gagliardi, CBS Publisher, 1 st
Edition 2019.
3. Satellite Communications Engineering – Wilbur L. Pritchard, Robert A
Nelson and Henri G. Suyderhoud, 2nd Edition, Pearson Publications, 2003.
Reference Books:
1. Satellite Communications: Design Principles – M. Richharia, BS
Publications, 2nd Edition, 2003.
2. Satellite Communication – D.C Agarwal, Khanna Publications, 5th Edition
2008.
3. Satellite Communications: Concepts and Applications – K.N. Raja Rao,
PHI, 2nd Edition 2004
4. Satellite Communications – Dennis Roddy, McGraw Hill, 4 th Edition,
2009.
Online Resources:
1. UCLA University EC ENGR X 422.19 https://www.uclaextension.edu/
engineering/electrical- computer-engineering/course/satellite-
communication-system-design-ec-engr-x
2. MIT Open courseware https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/16-851-satellite-
engineering-fall- 2003/resources/l2_orbital_mech/
Course Outcomes:
At the end of the course, the students will be able to
1. Understand basic concepts and frequency allocations for satellite
communication, orbital mechanics.
2. Envision the satellite sub systems with the Knowledge of Multiple beam
focusing.
3. Familiarize the concept of G/T ratio
4. Analyze in design of satellite links for specified C/N.
5. Understand Earth station technologies.
6. Know the concepts of LEO, NGSO Satellite Systems with High
Throughput.
k  k  k276 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127LC  3 0 0 3
TELECOMMUNICATION SWITCHING SYSTEMS
(Open Elective-2)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To expose through the evolution of switching systems from
electromechanical systems to stored program controlled digital systems.
2. To provide knowledge to the students regarding design and analysis of
electronic space division switching systems.
3. To provide knowledge to the students regarding design and analysis of
time division switching systems.
4. To inculcate students on various traffic engineering concepts.
5. To inculcate students on various switching techniques used in
Telecommunications.
UNIT 1: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Telecommunication Switching Systems: Introduction, Evolution of
Telecommunications, Basics of a switching system, Crossbar Switching,
Principles of Crossbar Switching, Crossbar Switch Configuration, Crosspoint
Technology, Crossbar Exchange Organization.
UNIT 2: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Electronic Space Division Switching: Stored Program Control, Centralized
SPC, Distributed SPC, Software Architecture, Application Software,
Enhanced services, Two-Stage Networks, Three-Stage Networks.
UNIT 3: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Time Division Switching: Basic Time Division Space Switching, Basic Time
Division Time Switching, Time Multiplexed Space Switching, Time
Multiplexed Time Switching, Combination Switching, Three Stage
Combination Switching, n - Stage Combinational Switching.
UNIT 4: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Telecommunications Traffic : Introduction, The Unit of Traffic, Congestion,
Traffic Measurement, A Mathematical Model, Lost-Call Systems, Theory,
Traffic Performance, Loss Systems in Tandem, Use of Traffic Tables, Queuing
Systems, The Second Erlang Distribution, Probability of Delay.
UNIT 5: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Circuit Switching and Packet Switching: Switching Networks, Circuit
Switching Networks, Circuit Switching Concepts, Packet Switching
Principles.2022-2023 277
Virtual Circuit Switching: Global Addressing, Virtual Circuit Identifier,
Three Phases, Data Transfer Phase, Setup Phase, Teardown Phase.
Text Books:
1. Thyagarajan Viswanathan, Tele Communication Switching System and
Networks, PHI, 2000.
2. J. E Flood, Telecommunications Switching and Traffic Networks, Pearson
Education, 2006.
3. William Stallings, Data and Computer Communications, Seventh Edition,
TMH, 2003.
Reference Books:
1. Behrouz A.Forouzan, Data Communications and Networking, Third
Edition, TMH.
2. Achyut. S.Godbole, Data Communications & Networks, TMH, 2004.
3. H. Taub & D. Schilling, Principles of Communication Systems, 2
nd
Edition, TMH, 2003.
4. S.Keshav, An Engineering approach to computer networking, Addison
Wesely.
Online References:
1. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/book/10.1002/0471208051
2. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telecommunication
Course Outcomes:
At the end of the course, the students will be able to
1. Understand the evolution of telecommunication systems, advancements
in telecommunications, classification of switching systems as well as
the basics of switching systems.
2. Analyse the principles and various configurations of Crossbar Switching
considering factors like switching capacity and switching elements.
3. Analyze electronic space division switching, Two-Stage Networks, and
Three-Stage Networks, considering factors like switching capacity,
switching elements and blocking probability.
4. Understand various configurations of time division switching and
combination of both Space Switching and Time Switching to achieve
improved efficiency and flexibility.
5. Apply mathematical models to measure telecommunication traffic, predict
congestion, and assess network performance, considering factors like
call loss and queuing systems.
6. Develop an understanding of various switching techniques like Circuit
switching, Packet switching and Virtual Circuit Switching.
k  k  k278 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech. I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127LA  3 0 0 3
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES
(Open Elective-2)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To understand various renewable energy resources available at a location
and assessments of its potential, using tools and techniques.
2. To create awareness on Solar energy radiation, its interactions,
measurement and estimation.
3. To study site selection for wind turbines, wind systems, measurements
and instrument.
4. To acquire knowledge on Geothermal, wave, tidal and OTEC resources,
site selection.
UNIT 1: (~7 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: Definitions, Concepts and limitations of RES Criteria for
assessing the potential of NCES, Classification of RES- Solar-Wind-
Geothermal- Biomass- Ocean energy sources, Comparison. Solar energy :
Solar radiation spectrum - Extra-terrestrial and terrestrial solar radiation, solar
constant, Measurement of solar Radiation -Pyranometer,  Pyrheliometer,
sunshine recorder.
UNIT 2:(~9 Lecture Hours)
Solar Energy Collection , Storage and Applications : Energy Collection:
Flat plate and Concentrating collectors, Classification of Concentrating
collectors.
Energy Storage: Definition of Sensible heat, Latent heat, Stratified storage
- Solar ponds - Applications.
Solar Photovoltaic Generation (elementary treatment only) : PV
Generation, Photovoltaic energy conversion – Operating principle,
Photovoltaic cell concepts, Cell, module, array, Series and parallel
combinations, Potential in India.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Wind energy (elementary treatment only) : Power in Wind, Betz criteria,
Types of wind mills, Aerodynamics of wind energy -basic components of
wind energy systems, Potential in India.
Bio-energy: Biomass resources ,Bio-Conversion Technologies -Densification-
Combustion and Incineration -thermo-chemical -Bio chemical – Aerobic
&Anaerobic digestion -ethanol fermentation Types of Bio-gas plants-floating
drum and fixed dome type.2022-2023 279
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Geothermal energy : Structure of Earth’s Interior-Geothermal Resources -
Hydro thermal resources - Geopressured -Hot dry rocks- magma resources.
Geothermal Power generation from various geothermal resources.
Ocean energy: OTEC - Principle of utilization, types up of OTEC plants-
open loop and closed loop OTEC systems Tidal and wave energy: potential
and conversion Techniques.
UNIT 5: (~6 Lecture Hours)
Direct Energy Conversion: Need for DEC, types of DEC-fuel cell, Magento
hydro dynamic energy conversion (MHD) Thermoelectric conversion working
principle (elementary treatment only) Combined cycle and Co-generation.
Text Books:
1. D.P.Kothari, K.C.Singhal and Rakesh Ranjan, Renewable Energy Sources
and Emerging Technologies, 2nd Edition, P.H.I., 2014.
2. B.H.Khan, Non-Conventional Energy Resources, 3 rd Edition, McGraw
Hill Education, 2017
3. Twidell&Wier, Renewable Energy Resources, 3 rd Edition, CRC Press
(Taylor & Francis), 2006.
Reference Books:
1. G .D. Rai, Non-Conventional Energy Sources, 5 th Edition, Khanna
Publishers, 2009
2. Sukhatme.S.P, Solar Energy: Principles of Thermal Collection and
Storage, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2008.
Online Resources:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103103206
Course Outcomes:
After completion of this course, the students should able to
1. Define and comprehend the relevance of RES.
2. Identify different forms of Wind and Solar energy systems.
3. Assess working of OTEC, Ocean energy, Biomass energy and Geothermal
energy systems.
4. Explain the need for usage of renewable energy resources and energy
conservation.
5. Differentiate between power generation concepts of Renewable & Non-
Renewable sources.
6. Describe the conversion technologies using biomass, Tidal, Wave and
Geothermal energy resources.
k  k  k280 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech. I-Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127LB  3 0 0 3
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
(Open Elective-2)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course objectives: This course will enable the students:
1. To develop an understanding towards basic concepts of the research
methodology.
2. To familiarize primary disparity between quantitative research and
qualitative research.
3. To provide knowledge to define appropriate research problem and its
parameters.
4. To familiarize tools and techniques used for preparation of report writing.
UNIT 1: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Research Methodology: Objectives and Motivation of Research, Types of
Research, Research Approaches, Significance of Research, Research Methods
verses Methodology, Research and Scientific Method, Importance of Research
Methodology, Research Process, Criteria of Good Research, Problems
Encountered by Researchers in India.
UNIT 2: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Defining the Research Problem: Definition of Research Problem, selecting
the Problem, Necessity of Defining the Problem, Technique involved in
Defining a Problem.
Literature Survey: Importance of Literature Survey, Sources of Information,
Assessment of Quality of Journals and Articles, Information through Internet.
Literature Review: Need of Review, Guidelines for Review, Record of
Research Review.
UNIT 3: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Research Design: Meaning of Research Design, Need for Research Design,
Feature of a Good Design, Important Concepts Related to Research Design,
Different Research Designs, Basic Principles of Experimental Design.
Design of Sample Surveys : Sample Design, Sampling and Non Sampling
Errors, Sample Survey Versus Census Survey. Types of Sampling Designs:
Non Probability Sampling, Probability Sampling.
UNIT 4: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Data Collection and Preparation: Collection of Primary data: Observation
method, Interview method, Questionnaires, Schedules. Collection of
Secondary data, Case study method.2022-2023 281
Data Preparation: Questionnaire checking, Editing, Coding, Classification,
Tabulation. Graphical Representation:  Pie chart, Bar chart, Histogram,
Frequency Polygon.
UNIT 5: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Interpretation and Report Writing: Meaning of Interpretation, Techniques
of Interpretation, Precautions of interpretation. Significance of Report Writing,
Steps in Writing the Report, Format of the Research Report. Technical paper
writing/Journal paper writing, Making Presentation, Use of Visual Aids,
Elementary Treatment of Plagiarism Tools.
Text Books:
1. C.R Kothari & Gaurav Garg, Research Methodology, Methods &
Technique, New Age International Publishers, 2019.
2. R. Ganesan, Research Methodology for Engineers, MJP Publishers, 2016.
Reference Books:
1. R.Pannerselvam, Research Methodology, Prentice hall of India, 2014.
2. Ratan Khananabis and Suvasis Saha, Research Methodology, Universities
Press, Hyderabad, 2015.
3. G . Nageswara Rao, Research Methodology and Quantitative methods,
BS Publications, Hyderabad, 2012.
Online Resources:
1. Onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in
Course Outcomes:
At the end of the course students are expected to
1. Develop an understanding on various kinds of research and objectives
of doing research.
2. Perform literature reviews using print and online databases.
3. Design good research.
4. Collect required data for Research and to adopt methods for data
collection.
5. Interpret the data from research perception.
6. Write and present a substantial technical report and document.
k  k  k282 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127KX  3 0 0 3
INDUSTRIAL MANAGEMENT
(Open Elective-2)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Educate the importance of productivity in production process.
2. Managing various production activities and quality aspects
3. Inculcate the importance of industrial safety & legislation.
UNIT 1: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Industrial Management
Industrial Management –  Introduction – Need and Scope of Industrial
Management.
Production Management – Plant location – Factors affecting Plant location
- Plant Layout – Types of Plant Layout – Product, Process, Fixed Position
and Combination Layout - Production – Introduction – Types of Production.
Productivity – Production vs Productivity – Objectives – Factors affecting
Productivity – (Theory only) – Measures to improve Productivity and its
benefits.
UNIT 2: (~ 09 Lecture Hours)
Operations and Materials Management
Operations Management – Work study – Definition – Objectives – Principles
of Work study – Method study - Definition - Objectives – Steps of Method
study. Work measurement – Definition - objectives – Time study – Steps in
Time study – Uses of Time study.
Materials Management – Definition – Objectives – Functions – Purchase
procedure – ABC analysis – VED Analysis.
UNIT 3: (~ 09 Lecture Hours)
Inventory and Stores Management
Inventory Management – Introduction - Functions of Inventory Control –
Advantages of Inventory Control – Economic Order Quantity - Methods of
Inventory issues – FIFO, LIFO, Simple average and Weighted Average
methods (simple problems).
Stores Management – Stores Keeping – Classification of Stores – Stores
Records.
Modern techniques in Inventory and Stores Management – Introduction
to Material Resource Planning (MRP) - Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
– Just in Time (JIT) - Supply Chain Management (SCM).2022-2023 283
UNIT 4: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Quality Management and Control
Quality Management – Introduction, Contributions of Juran, Deming,
Crosby, Total Quality Management - Quality Policy.
Statistical Quality Control – Need for Quality control- Sampling techniques
- Advantages of Quality control – Shewart Control Charts - Test of variables
- Mean chart and Range chart – Test of Attributes – c Chart and p Chart
(simple problems) - Six Sigma.
UNIT 5: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Industrial Safety and Security
Industrial Safety– Objectives of Industrial safety – Planning of Industrial
safety – Industrial accidents and their types – Causes of Accidents – Risk
Management in Industrial safety.
Industrial Security- Introduction- Need - Principles of security – Essential
ingredients of security.
Text Books:
1. O.P. Khanna (2018) Industrial Engineering and Management, Dhanpat
Rai Publications Pvt. Ltd.
2. T.R. Banga, N K Agarwal, S.C. Sharma (2008) Industrial Engineering
and Management Science, 12
th Edition, Khanna Publishers.
Reference Books:
1. Joseph, G . Monks (2012) Operations Management -Theory and Problems,
3rd Edition, McGraw- Hill Series.
2. NVS Raju (2013) Industrial Engineering & Management, Cengage
Learning.
3. Besterfield (2013) Total Quality Management, 3 rd Edition, Pearson.
4. S.Subramanian (2006) Industrial Security Management, Gyan Publishing
House.
Online Resources:
1. Operations Management : https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc18_me26/
preview
Course Outcomes:
After learning the contents of this course, the student must be able to
1. Organize the activities of Business efficiently.
2. Adapt to appropriate methods of production yielding productivity.
3. Identify efficient methods of production.
4. Handle inventory efficiently for improving Productivity.
5. Implement and maintain Quality standards in Production.
6. Understand industrial safety and security.
k  k  k284 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech I Semester L T P C
Course Code: 127KS  3 0 0 3
BEHA VIOURAL SKILLS AND PROFESSIONAL
COMMUNICATION
(Open Elective-2)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To achieve the desired life skills and social skills in their workplace.
2. To enable students to handle and overcome the professional challenges
and conflicts in a working environment.
3. To facilitate the students to understand and develop their managerial skills
in a professional environment.
4. To help the students understand professional and cross cultural
communication through digital technologies.
5. To develop critical thinking skills for speech and writing.
UNIT 1: (~ 09 lecture hours)
Life Skills: Essential Social Skills and Presentation Skills– Confidence
Building – Self-esteem– Positive Attitude – Assertiveness – Johari Window.
UNIT 2: (~10 lecture hours)
Critical Thinking Skills: Decision Making - Problem Solving – Negotiation
- Conflict Resolution and Creative Thinking – Blooms Taxonomy.
UNIT 3: (~10 lecture hours)
Managerial Skills: Time Management – Stress Management – Crisis
Management – Conflict Management – Relationship Management.
UNIT 4: (~10 lecture hours)
Professional Skills: Digital Communication – Social Networking – Cross
Cultural and Cross Functional Communication – Professional Etiquettes and
Netiquettes.
UNIT 5: (~09 lecture hours)
Fundamental Values through Diversity and Inclusivity:  Meaning and
concept of diversity and inclusivity – learner diversity—Diversity for
sustainability—strength of diversity for inclusivity –Inclusivity in
workplace— strategies for inclusivity Importance of Resilience – Concepts
of resilience – qualities of a resilient person – strategies for building resilience.2022-2023 285
Reference Books:
1. Meenakshi Raman and Shalini, Softskills: Key to success in workplace
and life, Cengage Publications (2018).
2. Barun, K. Mitra, Personality Development and Soft Skills , Oxford
University Press, 2 nd Edition (2016).
3. Sailesh Sen Gupta, Business and Managerial Communication , PH1
Learning Pvt. Ltd., (2011).
Online Courses:
1. Softskills : https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc21_hs76/preview
2. Emotional Intelligence: https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc20_hs13/
preview
Course Outcomes:
After the completion of the course, the students will be able to
1. Communicate with more confidence and self-esteem.
2. Give better presentation and explanation using digital aids and tools.
3. Perform effectively and efficiently in the work place environment.
4. Exhibit better tolerance and receptiveness in understanding and accepting
diversity.
5. Apply higher thinking order in the self-development process.
6. Equip oneself to handle the work related challenges and conflicts
professionally.
k  k  k286 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 128LE  3 0 0 3
CLOUD COMPUTING
(Open Elective - 3)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To explain evolving computer model called cloud computing.
2. To introduce the various levels of services that can be achieved by cloud.
3. To describe the security aspects of cloud.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction - Cloud computing at a glance, Historical developments,
Building cloud computing environments.
Cloud Computing Architecture - The cloud reference model, Types of
clouds, Economics of the cloud, Open challenges.
UNIT 2: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Virtualization - Characteristics of virtualized environments, Taxonomy of
virtualization techniques, Virtualization and cloud computing, Pros and cons
of virtualization, Technology examples- Xen, VMware, Microsoft Hyper-V .
Migrating into a Cloud, Virtual Machines Provisioning and Migration
Services.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Cloud Platforms in Industry : Amazon web services, Google App Engine,
Microsoft Azure, Aneka- Integration of private and public cloud.
Cloud Programming and Software Environments: Programming Support
for Google App Engine: Programming the Google App Engine, Google File
System(GFS), BigTable, Google’s NOSQL System, Chubby, Google’s
Distributed Lock Service, Programming on Amazon AWS and Microsoft
Azure: Programming on Amazon EC2, Amazon Simple Storage Service(S3),
Amazon Elastic Block Store(EBS) and SimpleDB, Microsoft Azure
Programming Support.
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Security in the Cloud - Cloud Security Challenges, Software-as-a-Service
Security.
Secure Distributed Data Storage in Cloud Computing - Cloud Storage:
from LANs to WANs, Technologies for Data Security in Cloud Computing.
Data Security in the Cloud- The Current State of Data Security in the Cloud,
Cloud Computing and Data Security Risk, Cloud Computing and Identity,
The Cloud, Digital Identity, and Data Security, Content Level Security-Pros
and Cons.2022-2023 287
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
SLA Management - Traditional Approaches to SLO Management, Types of
SLA, Life Cycle of SLA, SLA Management in Cloud, Automated Policy-
based Management.
Advanced Topics in Cloud Computing – Energy Efficiency in Clouds:
Energy-Efficient and Green Cloud Computing Architecture, Market Based
Management of Clouds: Market-Oriented Cloud Computing, A Reference
Model for MOCC, Technologies and initiatives Supporting MOCC, Federated
Clouds/Inter Cloud: Characteristics and Definition, Cloud Federation Stack.
Text Books:
1. Rajkumar Buyya, Christian Vecchiola and S.Thamarai Selvi, Mastering
Cloud Computing: Foundations and Applications Programming, McGraw
Hill Education, 2013.
2. Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and Andrzej, Cloud Computing:
Principles and paradigms Wiley, 2011.
3. John W. Rittinghouse and James F. Ransome, Cloud Computing:
Implementation, Management, and Security by CRC, 2010.
Reference Books:
1. Kai Hwang, Geoffrey C.Fox, Jack J Dongarra and Elsevier, Distributed
and cloud computing, 2012.
2. A. Kannammal, Fundamentals of Cloud Computing, CL India, 2015.
3. Tim Mather, Subra Kumaraswamy and Shahed Latif, Cloud Security and
Privacy, An Enterprise Perspective on Risks and Compliance. By
Publisher: O’Reilly Media 2009.
Online Resources:
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_cs42
2. https://aws.amazon.com/
3. https://azure.microsoft.com/en-in
4. https://cloud.google.com/
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Articulate the main concepts, key technologies, strengths, and limitations
of cloud computing and Illustrate the broad perceptive of cloud
architecture and model.
2. Apply and design suitable Virtualization concept.
3. Explore some important cloud computing driven commercial systems
such as Google Apps, Microsoft Azure and Amazon Web Services and
design other web cloud applications.
4. Assess Cloud storage systems and Cloud security, the risks involved, its
impact and develop cloud application.
5. Devise performance negotiations between cloud service providers and
consumers through SLAs.
6. Interpret enterprise level requirements by learning Energy efficient,
Market ready, Federated cloud systems.288 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 128LD  3 0 0 3
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGIES
(Open Elective- 3)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To enable students develop understanding on Blockchain Technology
2. To equip students with knowledge on cryptocurrencies working.
3. To empower students, gain knowledge on Blockchain implementation
technologies.
UNIT 1: (~ 6 Lecture Hours)
Blockchain 101: The History of Blockchain and Bitcoin, Types of Blockchain,
Consensus, CAP theorem and blockchain. Decentralization: - Decentralization
using Blockchain, Methods of decentralization, Routes to decentralization
Blockchain and Full Ecosystem, Smart contracts, Decentralized
Organizations, Platforms for Decentralization.
UNIT 2: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Introducing Bitcoin: Bitcoin, Digital Keys and Addresses, Transactions,
Mining. Bitcoin Network and Payments: – Wallets, Bitcoin payments,
Innovation in Bitcoin Alternative Coins: – Theoretical Foundations, Bitcoin
limitations, Namecoin, Primecoin, Zcash Smart Contracts: – Ricardian
Contracts.
UNIT 3: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Ethereum 101: The Ethereum network, Components of the Ethereum
ecosystem. Further Ethereum: - Programming Languages-Runtime Byte Code,
Blocks and Blockchain, Fee Schedule – Supporting Protocols. Development
Tools and Frameworks: - Solidity Language.
UNIT 4: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Introducing Web3: Web3 – Contract Deployment, POST Requests,
Development frameworks. Hyperledger: - Hyperledger as a protocol, The
reference architecture, Fabric-Hyperledger Fabric– Distributed Ledger,
Sawtooth Lake, Corda.
UNIT 5: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Alternative Blockchains: Blockchains- Kadena, Ripple, Stellar, Rootstock,
Quorum, Tezos, Storj, Maidsafe, BigchainDB, Multichain, Tendermint,
Platforms and Frameworks-Eris. Scalability and Other Challenges: -
Scalability, Privacy. Current Landscape and What’s Next: – Emerging trends,2022-2023 289
Other Challenges, Blockchain Research, Notable Projects, Miscellaneous
Tools.
Text Book:
1. Imran Bashir, Mastering Blockchain: Distributed Ledger Technology,
Decentralization and Smart Contracts Explained, 2 nd Edition, Packt
Publishing, 2018.
Reference Books:
1. Arshdeep Bahga, Vijay Madisetti, Blockchain Applications: A Hands On
Approach, VPT, 2017.
2. Blockchain Technology, Chandramouli Subramanian, Asha A George,
Abilash KA and MeenaKarthikeyan, Universities Press, 2020.
3. The Blockchain Developer: A Practical Guide for Designing,
Implementing, Publishing, Testing and Securing Distributed Blockchain-
based projects, Elad Elrom, Springer Nature B.V , 2019.
Online Resources:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/105/106105184/
2. https://github.com/rddill-IBM/ZeroToBlockchain
3. tech.seas.harvard.edu/free-blockchain
4. https://www.codecademy.com/learn/introduction-toblockchain/modules/
fundamental-blockchain- concepts
5. The Basics of Blockchain & Bitcoin Fundamentals Course | Udemy
Course Outcomes:
After completion of this course, students will be able to
1. Acquire understanding on Blockchain Technology built-in way.
2. Interpret how various cryptocurrencies work.
3. Articulate Ethereum Blockchain for developing smart contracts.
4. Apprehend knowledge on Web3 and Hyperledger Fabric for decentralized
apps.
5. Exemplifying different alternative and emerging Blockchains.
6. Discover real-time usage of Blockchain.
k  k  k290 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 128LL  3 0 0 3
INTRODUCTION TO NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING
(Open Elective–3)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To introduce the fundamental concepts and techniques of natural language
processing.
2. To understand the role of syntax and semantics of the text processing.
3. To gain an in-depth understanding of the computational properties and
commonly used algorithms for processing linguistic information.
4. To explore different ways of building an NLP system through a case
study on Question Answering system.
UNIT 1: ( ~10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction: What is Natural Language Processing (NLP), Origins of NLP,
Language and Knowledge, The Challenges of NLP, Language and Grammar,
Processing Indian Languages, NLP Applications.
Finding the Structure of Words: Words and their Components, Issues and
Challenges, Morphological Models.
Finding the Structure of Documents: Introduction, Methods, Complexity
of Approaches, Performances of the Approaches.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Syntax: Parsing Natural Language,
Treebanks: A Data-Driven Approach to Syntax, Representation of Syntactic
Structure, Parsing Algorithms, Models for Ambiguity Resolution in Parsing,
Multilingual Issues: Tokenization, Case and Encoding, Word Segmentation,
Morphology.
UNIT 3: (9 Lecture Hours)
Semantic Parsing: Introduction, Semantic Interpretation, System Paradigms,
Wordsense, Predicate- Argument Structure, Meaning Representation.
UNIT 4: (~ 9 Lecture Hours)
Language Modeling: Introduction, N-Gram Models, Language Model
Evaluation, Parameter Estimation, Language Model Adaptation, Types of
Language Models- Class-Based Language Models, Syntax-Based Language
Models, Neural Network language Models, Language-Specific Modeling
Problems.2022-2023 291
UNIT5: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Question Answering: Introduction and History, Architectures, Source
Acquisition and Preprocessing, Question Analysis, Search and Candidate
Extraction, Answer Scoring, Cross Lingual Question Answering, A Case
Study.
Text Book:
1. Daniel M. Bikel and ImedZitouni, Multilingual Natural Language
Processing Applications: From Theory to Practice, Pearson Publication,
2013.
Reference Books:
1. Tanvier Siddiqui, U.S. Tiwary, Natural Language Processing and
Information Retrieval, Oxford Higher Education, 2008.
2. Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin, Speech and Language Processing,
An Introduction to Natural Language Processing, Computational
Linguistics and Speech Recognition, 2011.
3. Steven Bird, Ewan Klein and Edward Loper, Natural Language
Processing with Python, O Reilly, 2009.
Online Resources:
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23_cs45/preview
2. Natural Language Processing Specialization (DeepLearning.AI) |
Coursera
3. https://www.udemy.com/topic/natural-language-processing/
4. Stanford CS 224N | Natural Language Proce‘ssing with Deep Learning
5. CS 626-460: Natural Language Processing (iitb.ac.in)
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Demonstrate knowledge on the fundamental principles of natural
language processing and document structure.
2. Understand the syntax processing and multilingual issues of language
processing.
3. Analyze semantic interpretation and system paradigms for semantic
parsing.
4. Understand various parameters to evaluate language models.
5. Identify suitable modeling techniques for solving real time problems.
6. Explore different ways to model the system similar to question answering
system.
k  k  k292 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 128LF  3 0 0 3
DATA MINING
(Open Elective–3)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Learn data mining concepts understand association rules mining.
2. Discuss classification algorithms learn how data is grouped using
clustering techniques.
3. To develop the abilities of critical analysis to data mining systems and
applications.
4. To implement practical and theoretical understanding of the technologies
for data mining.
5. To understand the strengths and limitations of various data mining models.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Data Mining: What is Data Mining, Definition, KDD, Data
Mining Architecture, Challenges, Data Mining Functionalities, Data Mining
Task Primitives, and Major Issues in Data Mining?
Data Pre-processing: Data Cleaning, Data Integration and Transformation,
Data Reduction: Dimensionality Reduction, Feature Subset Selection,
Discretization and Binarization, Measures of Similarity and Dissimilarity
Basics, Similarities and dissimilarities between Simple Attributes and Data
Objects.
UNIT 2: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Association Rules: Problem Definition, Frequent Item Set Generation, The
APRIORI Algorithm, Support and Confidence Measures, Association Rule
Generation, FP- Growth Algorithm, Mining various kinds of Association rules,
Compact Representation of Frequent Item sets: Maximal Frequent Item Sets,
Closed Frequent Item Sets.
UNIT 3: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Classification and Prediction : Problem Definition, General Approaches to
solving a classification problem, Evaluation of classifiers, Classification
Techniques, Decision Tree Induction, Naive Bayes Classifier, Bayesian Belief
Networks, K–Nearest neighbor classification Algorithm and Characteristics,
Prediction: Linear, Logistic Regressions.2022-2023 293
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Clustering: Cluster Analysis, Categorization of Major Clustering Methods,
Partitioning Clustering - K-Means Algorithm, K- Means Additional issues,
PAM Algorithm, Hierarchical Clustering : Agglomerative Methods and
divisive methods, Basic Agglomerative Hierarchical Clustering, Specific
techniques: MIN, MAX, Group Average, Ward’s method and Centroid
methods Key Issues in Hierarchical clustering, Strengths and Weakness,
Outlier Detection.
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Mining Time Series and Sequence Data: Mining Time-Series Data, Mining
Sequence Patterns in Transactional Databases.
Mining Multimedia, Text and Web Data: Multimedia Data Mining, Text
Mining, Mining the World Wide Web.
Text Books:
1. Jiawei Han and Michelinen Kamber, Data Mining-Concepts and
Techniques, 2012, 3
rd Edition, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Elsevier.
2. Pang-Ning Tan, Vipin Kumar and Michael Steinbanch, Introduction to
Data Mining, Pearson Education.
Reference Books:
1. Arun K Pujari, Data Mining Techniques, 3 rd Edition, Universities Press.
2. Pualraj Ponnaiah, Data Warehouse Fundamentals by Wiley- Interscience
Publication.
3. VikaramPudi and P Radha Krishna, Data Mining by Oxford University
Press.
Online Resources:
1. https://www.kdnuggets.com/websites/index.html
2. https://www.ngdata.com/data-mining-resources.
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand the fundamental concepts and tasks of data mining.
2. Perform the pre-processing of data.
3. Formulate the association rules using different Algorithms.
4. Evaluate various classifiers.
5. Analyze different clustering techniques.
6. Understand the mining of temporal and multimedia data.
k  k  k294 Computer Science and Engineering
IV Year B.Tech II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 128LP  3 0 0 3
WEARABLE DEVICES AND ITS APPLICATIONS
(Open Elective-3)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Identify the need for development of wearable devices and its implications
on various sectors.
2. Comprehend the design and development of various wearable inertial
sensors and wearable and physiological activity monitoring devices for
use in healthcare applications.
3. Discuss the usage of various biochemical and gas sensors as wearable
devices.
4. Acquaint various wearable locomotive sensors as assistive devices for
tracking and navigation.
UNIT 1:  (~08 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Wearable Devices Motivation for development of Wearable
Devices, The emergence of wearable computing and wearable electronics,
Types of wearable Sensors: Invasive & Non-invasive; Intelligent clothing,
Industry sectors’ overview – sports, healthcare, Fashion and entertainment,
military, environment monitoring, mining industry, public sector and safety.
UNIT 2: ( ~10 Lecture Hours)
Wearable Inertial Sensors Wearable Inertial Sensors - Accelerometers,
Gyroscopic sensors and Magnetic sensors; Modalityof Measurement-
Wearable Sensors, Invisible Sensors,In-Shoe Force and Pressure
Measurement;Applications: Fall Risk Assessment, Fall Detection, Gait
Analysis, Quantitative Evaluation of Hemiplegic and Parkinson’s Disease
patients.Physical Activity monitoring: Human Kinetics, Cardiac Activity,
Energy Expenditure measurement: Pedometers, Actigraphs.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Wearable Devices for Healthcare Wearable Blood Pressure (BP)
Measurement: Cuff-Based Sphygmomanometer, Cuffless Blood Pressure
Monitor.Study of flexible and wearable Piezoresistive sensors for cuffless
blood pressure measurement.Wearable sensors for Body Temperature:
Intermittent and Continuous temperature monitoring,Detection principles –
thermistor, infrared radiation, thermopile, Modality of measurement wearable,
adhesive/tattoo type. Conductive textile electrodes, Knitted Piezoresistive
Fabric (KPF)sensors.2022-2023 295
UNIT 4: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Wearable Biochemical and Gas SensorsWearable Biochemical Sensors:
Parameters of interest, System Design –Textile based,Microneedle based;
Types: Non-invasive Glucose Monitoring Devices, GlucoWatch®
G2Biographer, GlucoTrackTM; Pulse oximeter, Portable Pulse Oximeters,
wearable pulse oximeter, Wearable capnometer for monitoring of expired
carbon dioxide.
Wearable gas sensors: Metal Oxide (MOS) type,electro chemical type, new
materials-CNTs,graphene, Zeolites; Detection of atmospheric pollutants.
UNIT 5: (~12 Lecture Hours)
Wearable Cameras and Microphones for Navigation Cameras in wearable
devices, Applications in safety and security, navigation, Enhancing sports
media, Automatic digital diary. Cameras in smart-watches; Use of Wearable
Microphones: MEMS microphones, Bioacoustics, Microphones and AI for
respiratory diagnostics and clinical trials.Wearable Assistive Devices for the
Blind - Hearing and Touch sensation, Assistive Devices for Fingers and
Hands, Assistive Devices for wrist, forearm and feet, vests and belts, head-
mounteddevices.
Text Books:
1. Toshiyo Tamura and Wenxi Chen, “Seamless Healthcare Monitoring”,
Springer 2018.
2. EdwardSazonov and Michael R. Neuman, “Wearable Sensors -
Fundamentals, Implementation and Applications”, Elsevier Inc., 2014.
3. Aimé Lay-Ekuakille and Subhas Chandra Mukhopadhyay, “Wearable
and Autonomous Biomedical Devices and Systems for Smart
Environment”, Springer 2010.
Reference Books:
1. Subhas Chandra “Wearable Electronics Sensors - For Safe and Healthy
Living”, Springer (June 8, 2015).
2. Shantanu Bhattacharya, A K Agarwal, NripenChanda, Ashok Pandey
and Ashis Kumar Sen, “Environmental, Chemical and Medical Sensors”,
Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
3. M. Mardonova and Y . Choi, “Review of Wearable Device Technology
and Its Applications to the Mining Industry,” Energies, vol. 11, p. 547,
2018.
4. N. Luo, W. Dai, C. Li, Z. Zhou, L. Lu, C. C. Y . Poon, et al., “Flexible
Piezoresistive Sensor Patch Enabling Ultralow Power Cuffless Blood
Pressure Measurement,” Advanced Functional Materials, vol. 26, pp.
1178-1187, 2016.296 Computer Science and Engineering
Online Resources:
1. https://www.udemy.com/course/wearable-technology-a-complete-primer-
on-wearables
2. https://www.coursera.org/learn/wearable-technologies
Course Outcomes:
At the end of the course, the students will be able to
1. Identify and understand the need for development of wearable devices
and its influence on various sectors.
2. Discuss the applications of various wearable inertial sensors for
biomedical applications.
3. Design and development of various Wearable monitoring devices for
detection of biochemical and physiological body signals activity for use
in healthcare applications.
4. Discuss and analyze the usage of various biochemical and gas sensors
as wearable devices.
5. Identify the use of various wearable locomotive tools for safety and
security, navigation.
6. Acquaint the usage of wearable devices as environmental monitoring,
safety and navigational assistive devices and other modern applications.
k  k  k2022-2023 297
IV Year B.Tech II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 128LG  3 0 0 3
SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
(Open Elective-3)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
This can be termed an advance level course in the electronic communication
engineering domain. The course has the following main objectives:
1. To demonstrate an understanding of systems terminology, definitions,
the design process, maintenance, and support of modern technological
systems.
2. To applying tools, methodologies, and procedures to manage systems
engineering problems and model systems.
3. To analyze the functions of a system and validate them
4. To understand the risks involved in systems engineering and developing
effective systems solutions to mitigate or reduce the risks.
5. To employ systems engineering analytical tools, techniques,
methodologies, and processes to assist in designing efficient and cost-
effective design solutions.
6. To evaluate a system and subsequently test it.
UNIT 1: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Systems engineering: Need for systems engineering,
Systems engg viewpoint, perspectives, domains, Systems engineering fields,
approaches, activities, and products, Systems engineering as a profession.
Complex system structure -building blocks, hierarchy, interfaces,
environment, interactions, complexity, System development process – life
cycle, evolutionary characteristics, Systems engineering method, Systems
testing throughout development.
UNIT 2: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Managing systems: Development, risks, work breakdown structure (WBS),
systems engineering management plan (SEMP), Systems risk management,
organizing for systems engineering, Need analysis – originating, operations,
functional, and feasibility, Need validation, systems ops requirement, System
requirements development, performance requirements.
Implementing concept : exploration, validating requirements, Concept
definition – selection and validation, functional analysis and allocation,
Systems architecture, system modeling languages, Model-Based Systems
Engineering (MBSE), Decision making, modeling for decisions, Simulation,
Trade-off analysis.298 Computer Science and Engineering
UNIT 3: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Risk Management: Program risk reduction, prototype development for risk
mitigation, Development testing, risk reduction, Revision of functional
analysis and design, Overview of probability data analysis, Hypothesis testing.
UNIT 4: (~ 10 Lecture Hours)
Engineering design : Implementing system building blocks, component
design, Design validation, change management, Concepts of reliability,
redundancy, Concepts of maintainability, availability, producibility, User
interface design and GUI, Case Studies and Case Study Presentation.
UNIT 5: (~ 12 Lecture Hours)
Testing and Evaluation and Installation: Integration, testing and evaluating
total system, Test planning and preparation, system integration, Developmental
and operational test and evaluation, Engineering for production, transition
from development to production, Installation, Installation testing, In-service
support, Upgrades and modernization.
Text Books:
1. Kossiakoff, A., Sweet, W.N., Seymour, S.J., and Biemer S.M., Systems
Engineering Second ed. John Wiley Sons Inc., New Jersey, 2011
2. International Council of Systems Engineering, Systems Engineering
Handbook, A guide for System Life Cycle Processes and Activities,
version 3.2.1, January 2011.
3. Systems Engineering Fundamentals, Department of Defense, Defense
Acquisition University, Systems Engineering Fundamentals, 2001.
Reference Book:
1. B. S., and Fabrycky, Systems Engineering and Analysis (5th Ed),
Blanchard, W. J. (2006).
2.
Pearson Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ. [ISBN 978-0-13-221735-4]
Online Resources:
1. Systems Engineering: Theory and Practice by Prof. Deepu Philip (IIT
Kanpur ) https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc21_mg39/preview
Course Outcomes:
Having gone through this course on Systems Engineering, the students would
be able to
1. Explain the significance of Systems Engineering and the System
development process.
2. Carry out the Systems engineering Management Plan and risk
management.
3. Model a system and implement decision making functions.
4. Develop prototype for risk mitigation and test it.
5. Implement, validate, maintain and design the user interface of the system.
6. Install, Test and evaluate the entire system.2022-2023 299
IV Year B.Tech. II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 128LN  3 0 0 3
WASTE MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES AND
POWER GENERATION
(Open Elective-3)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To classify the sources of solid waste& e-waste.
2. To identify methods of solid waste disposal.
3. To understand various waste management techniques.
4. To study various energy generation methods as per type of waste available
locally.
5. To analyze energy generation methods and recycling of waste.
UNIT 1: (~ 8 Lecture Hours)
Waste Management Sources & types of wastes (Industrial, Municipal, agro,
domestic). Generation of wastes, Pollution standards, Waste characterization.
Functional elements of waste management, technological aspects related to
waste, on site handling, storage, collection, transfer and transport.
UNIT 2: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Waste Management Issues Planning, organization & control Hazardous &
toxic wastes, hazard & its management, classification, generation, handling,
processing and disposal. Industrial safety, Waste disposal, Environmental
impact (toxic & non-toxic).
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Conversion Techniques & Methods Recovery of value added components:
Recycling, conversion products and energy Conversion technologies:
Incineration, – principal features of an incinerator – site selection and plant
layout of an incinerator - Thermo-chemical conversions. Biochemical
conversion: Biogas & ethanol Conventional Chemical & biological treatment.
Power generation & its utilization.
UNIT 4: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Processing Techniques and Recovery of Energy Processing techniques –
purposes mechanical volume reduction – necessary equipment – chemical
volume reduction –mechanical size reduction selection of equipment –
components separation – methods – drying and dewatering. Refusal disposal
– various methods.
UNIT5: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Concepts of Land Fill & e-Waste
Concepts of Land Fill: Land Fill method of solid waste disposal, Landfill300 Computer Science and Engineering
classification, Types, methods and Sitting consideration, Layout and
preliminary design of landfills: Composition, Movement and control of landfill
leachate and gases, Environmental monitoring for land fill gases.
E-Waste: E-waste in global context, Environmental concerns, Global trading
in hazardous waste, Management of e-waste, e-waste legislation, Government
regulations on e-waste management & Recycling.
Text Books:
1. Nicholas P. Cheremisinoff. Handbook of Solid Waste Management and
Waste Minimization Technologies. An Imprint of Elsevier, New Delhi
(2003)
2. P.AarneVesilind, William A. Worrell and Debra R. Reinhart. Solid Waste
Engineering. Thomson Asia Pte Ltd. Singapore (2002)
3. M.Dutta, B .P .Parida, B. K. Guha and T. R. Surkrishnan. Industrial Solid
WasteManagement and Landfilling practice. Narosa Publishing House,
New Delhi (1999).
Reference Books:
1. C.S.Rao. Environmental pollution Control Engineering. Wiley Eastern
Ltd.New Delhi (1995)
2. “E- waste in India: Research unit, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi,
June 2011”
2. M.L. Davis and D.A. Cornwell. Introduction to environmental
engineering. Mc Graw Hill International Edition, Singapore (2008)
3. S.K.Agarwal. Introduction to Environmental engineering. Mc Graw
Hill International Edition, Singapore (2008)
4. Hagerty, D.Joseph; Pavoni . Joseph L; Heer , John E., “ Solid Waste
Management”, New York, Van Nostrand , 1973
Online Resource:
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/103107125
Course Outcomes:
After completion of the course, students will be able to
1. Understand technologies for generation of energy from solid waste.
2. Compare methods of solid waste disposal.
3. Identify sources of energy from waste using various conversion
techniques.
4. Analyze methods for waste management.
5. Assess the harmful effects of e-waste.
6. Differentiate between the normal waste and e-waste.
k  k  k2022-2023 301
IV Year B.Tech II Semester L T P C
 Course Code: 128LM  3 0 0 3
MARKETING MANAGEMENT
(Open Elective-3)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. Outline the importance and key concepts of Marketing.
2. Understand and appreciate the emerging marketing trends
3. Highlight the foundation of Marketing mix and evolution of marketing
mix in modern era.
UNIT 1: (~08 Lecture Hours)
Introduction to Marketing Management
Marketing Management - Meaning and importance – Nature, Scope and
Functions - Evolution of Marketing concepts from Production Concept to
Holistic Marketing concept –Marketing Environment- Micro and Macro
Environment.
UNIT 2: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Market Segmentation
Market Segmentation : -STP Process- Levels & Patterns of Market
Segmentation – Segmentation of Consumer & Business Markets –Target
Marketing – Developing and Communicating a positioning strategy –
Differential Tools - New Product Development and its process.
UNIT 3: (~10 Lecture Hours)
Marketing Mix
Product Offering: Product and Product Mix – Product Line decisions – Brand
Decisions – Packaging and Labelling.
Pricing Strategies: - Meaning and objectives -factors influencing Pricing-
Pricing Methods and Strategies.
UNIT 4: (~09 Lecture Hours)
Distribution: - Concept and Importance- Different types of distribution
channels - Channel Intermediaries.
Promotion: - Nature and Importance of Promotions – Designing and
Managing Promotion Mix – Managing Advertising – Sales Promotion -
Personal Selling – Public Relation – Direct Marketing – Publicity and Social
Media. Brief overview of People, Process and Physical evidence.302 Computer Science and Engineering
UNIT 5: (~09 Lecture Hours)
Recent Trends in Marketing
Digital Marketing –Meaning and Importance - Green Marketing -– Managing
Digital Communication – E-Marketing -M-Marketing and Services
Marketing.
Case study/Marketing Plan for a Product or Service.
Text Books:
1. Philip Kotler (2017). Marketing Management (15
th ed.). Prentice – Hall
of India Pvt. Ltd.
2. Philip Kotler, Kevin Lane Keller (2017). Marketing Management (15 th
ed.). Pearson.
Reference Books:
1. Rajagopal (2008). Marketing – Concept and Cases. New Age International
(P) Ltd.
2. Tapan Panda (2009). Marketing Management(5 th ed.). Excel Publication.
3. Ramaswamy, V .S. & Namakumari S. (2013). Marketing Management
India (5th ed.). Macmillan Publication.
4. Saxena, R. (2019). Marketing Management (6th ed.). Tata McGraw Hill,
New Delhi.
5. Richard, J. Semenik(2006). Promotion & Integrated Marketing
Communication (1st ed.) Thomson South-Western.
Online Resources:
Marketing Management-I: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/110104068/
Marketing Management-II: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/110104070/
Course Outcomes:
After learning the contents of this course, the student must be able to
1. Remember and Comprehend  the importance of the Marketing
Management Process
2. Analyze the need and importance of Market segmentation, Targeting and
Positioning.
3. Interpret the elements of Product mix.
4. Enumerate strategies of Pricing in fixation.
5. Comprehend the dynamics of distribution and Promotion mix elements
to leverage marketing concepts for effective decision making.
6. Know the recent trends in marketing and understand the steps involved
in developing a Marketing plan.
k  k  k2022-2023 303
IV Year B.Tech. II Semester L T P C
Course Code: 128LH  3 0 0 3
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT
(Open Elective-3)
Prerequisites: -Nil-
Course Objectives:
1. To explain various stages of EIA process in India.
2. To provide knowledge on various aspects of Environment Impact
Assessment Methodologies and apply them on developmental activities.
3. To explain the outlines of EMP.
4. To explain the procedure on environmental audit.
5. To provide an overview of environmental legislation.
6. To review a few EIA reports.
UNIT 1: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Basic Concepts of EIA: Introduction -Definition of Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIA) and Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) , EIA Process
Flow Chart- Initial Environmental Examination (IEE), (Screening, Scoping,
Baseline Data Acquisition, Impact Identification, Prediction, Analysis, Public
Hearing, Draft EIS, Final EIS), Classification of Impacts, Elements of EIA,
Benefits of EIA, Preparation of Environmental Base map.
UNIT 2:  (~9 Lecture Hours)
EIA Methodologies: Introduction, Criteria for the Selection of EIA
Methodology, Methods of Impact Analysis – Impact Identification, Impact
prediction, Impact Evaluation
Different EIA Methods- (Rapid, Comprehensive, Adhoc, Checklist, Matrix,
Network, Environmental Media Quality Index and Overlay Methods). Cost
Benefit Analysis.
Impacts of Development Activities on Environmental Components:
Deforestation – Causes, Effects and Control Measures, Guidelines for
Preparation of Environmental Impact Statement.
UNIT 3: (~8 Lecture Hours)
Environmental Management Plan: Introduction, Objectives, Goals,
Purpose, Importance, Elements, EMP Preparation, Monitoring of  EMP.
UNIT 4: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Environmental Audit: Objectives of Environmental Audit, Types of
Environmental Audit, Audit Protocol. Stages of Environmental Audit - Onsite
Activities, Evaluation of Audit Data and Preparation of Audit Report, Post304 Computer Science and Engineering
Audit Activities. Case Studies and Preparation of Environmental Impact
Statement Report for various Industries.
UNIT 5: (~9 Lecture Hours)
Environmental Legislations: The Environmental (Protection) Act 1986, The
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1974, The Air (Prevention
and Control of Pollution) Act 1981, The Motor Act 1988, The Wild life
(Protection) Act 1972, National Bio-Diversity Act, 2002, Concept of ISO
9001 and ISO 14000 Standards.
Text Books:
1. Environmental Impact Assessment by Larry Canter, Mc Graw-Hill
Publications, 1996.
2. Environmental Impact Assessment by R. R Barthwal, New Age
International Publications, 2010.
3. Environmental Impact Assessment: Theory & Practice by P. Wathern
Publishers Rutledge, London, 1992.
Reference Books:
1. Environmental Pollution by R.K. Khitoliya, S. Chand Publishing, 2014.
2. Environmental Science and Engineering by J. Glynn and W. H. Gary,
Prentice Hall Publishers, 1996.
3. Environmental Science and Engineering by Suresh K. Dhameja, S.K.
Kataria and Sons Publication, New Delhi.2006.
4. Environmental Pollution and Control by, H. S. Bhatia, Galgotia
Publication Private Limited, Delhi. 2003.
5. Environmental Impact Assessment by M.Anji Reddy, BSP Books Private
Limited, 2017.
Web Resources:
1. Environmental Impact Assessment – Open Educational Resource http://
www.raymondsumouniversity.com/eia-local/about.html
2. Environmental Impact Assessment - https://unep.ch/etb/publications/
enviImpAsse.php
3. Urban Environmental Management - http://www.gdrc.org/uem/eia/
impactassess.html
4. Environmental Impact Assessment Report https://www.miga.org/sites/
default/files/archive/Documents/EIA_Rwanda_Stones.pdf2022-2023 305
Online Courses :
1. https://cept.ac.in/cce/admin/images/files/1347949702_po7tf.pdf
2. https://www.iisd.org/learning/eia/
3. https://www.iaia.org/iaia-training-courses.php
4. https://www.eiatraining.com/index.html.
Course Outcomes :
At the end of the course, the student will be able to
1. Identify the environmental attributes to be considered for EIA study.
2. Apply different methodologies in impact identification, prediction and
analysis.
3. Prepare EMP based on environmental legislation.
4. Carry out environmental audit.
5. Prepare EIA reports.
6. Prepare EIS for various industries.
k  k  kPROGRAM EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES (PEOs)
PEO 1 The student should be able to apply their knowledge in Mathematics,
Science, Engineering as well as Computer Science along with programming
skills in their Engineering education and career advancement.
PEO 2 They are expected to communicate well and get ready for understanding
the importance of social, business, technical and ethical aspects with which
a process or product is designed.
PEO 3 They should be able to excel in multidisciplinary teams, develop leadership
roles and inculcate problem solving capability, design skills and other diverse
career paths.
PEO 4 They should be able to develop  an interest in knowledge enhancement
with the evolving technologies.
PROGRAM OUTCOMES (POs)
PO 1 Engineering knowledge: To acquire firm knowledge of Mathematics, Science,
Engineering & Computer Science.
PO 2 Problem analysis: To identify, formulate & analyze requirements of IT
Applications.
PO 3 Design/development of solutions: To effectively apply engineering principles
to the design of computer & IT based Systems.
PO 4 Conduct investigations of complex problems: To synthesize research based
knowledge in the design of programming and analysis of data for providing
valid conclusions to complex problems.
PO 5 Modern tool usage: To possess skills for creating and selecting modern
software development tools.
PO 6 The engineer and society: To apply conceptual knowledge relevant to
professional engineering practices in societal, health, safety, legal and
cultural issues and their consequences.
PO 7 Environment and sustainability: To understand the impact of engineering
solutions in social and economic environments and work towards sustainable
development.
PO 8 Ethics: To understand contemporary legal, social & ethical issues in
computing.
PO 9 Individual and team work: To effectively work as an individual and
adapt to a team environment.
PO 10 Communication: To communicate precisely and effectively both in oral
and written in all engineering activities.
PO 11 Project management and finance: To apply engineering and management
principles for managing and leading economically feasible projects in multi
disciplinary environments as an individual and team member.
PO 12 Life-long learning: To develop confidence to engage in independent & lifelong
learning in the context of Technological changes.
PROGRAM SPECIFIC OUTCOMES (PSOs)
PSO 1 The ability to develop software projects using standard practices and suitable
programming environment.
PSO 2 To apply computer science knowledge in exploring and adopting latest
technologies in different co-curricular activities.G .NARAYANAMMA INSTITUTE OF
TECHNOLOGY & SCIENCE (For Women)
(AUTONOMOUS)
INSTITUTE VISION
To become  a center of quality education in Engineering and
Technology for women empowerment.
INSTITUTE MISSION
 To fulfill the academic aspirations of women engineers for
enhancing their intellectual capabilities and technical
competency.
 To Leverage Leading – Edge Technologies and cultivate
exemplary work culture.
 To facilitate success in their desired career in the field of
engineering to build a progressive nation.
INSTITUTE QUALITY POLICY
G . Narayanamma Institute of Technology and Science (For
Women), Hyderabad is committed in imparting Quality
Education and Training for women empowerment in the field of
“Engineering and Technology” and to satisfy applicable
requirements through continual improvement of the Quality
Management System by facilitating and supporting the staff and
students to work as a team in upgrading their knowledge and
skill in tune with the industrial and technological developments
through a set of Quality objectives.